*Working title, for identification only. The Dire ctor of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Supporting Reproductive Rights * 
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final  Digest  
On:   Friday, July 26, 2024  
Members:   Packard, Anderson, Wong , Troy, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now: The City’s Department of Public Health (DPH) offers reproductive health care. DPH supports the right to access 
the full range of reproductive health care, including abortions.  
 
A “limited services pregnancy center” primarily  provides services to pregnant p eople but does not provide abortion or emergency 
contraceptive services or referrals for such services. City law prohibits these  centers from disseminating untrue or misleading 
information about the services they provide.  
City law  allow s limited services pregnancy centers and clinics  that provide abortions to operate primarily on the ground floor  in 
designated districts in San Francisco.  
State law prohibits the City from cooperating with or providing information to any law enforcement agen cy of another state or the 
federal government regarding a  lawful  abortion performed in California.  
The Proposal: Proposition ___ would  declare it to be City policy to:  
• Serve as a safe place for people seeking reproductive care , including abortions ;  
• Protect the rights of pregnant pe ople to control their medical decisions ;  
• Safeguard the confidentiality of reproductive health information;  
Proposition __ would also:  
• Create a Reproductive Freedom F und that accept s grants and gifts  to support reproductive rights and services;  
• Require DPH to maintain a public website that lists facilities that provide  abortions or emergency contraception  or offer 
referrals for these  services , and  lists limited services pregnancy centers in San Francisco;  
• Authorize DPH to post  signs outside limited services pregnancy centers  to inform the public  that those facilities do not provide 
abortions or emergency contraception or offer referrals for these  services; t hese signs would  also indicate  where to obtain 
these services;  
• Limit City -funded facilities that provide abortions from requiring providers to have additional medical qualifications beyond 
those required by law;   
• Prohibit City officials from providing information to law enforcement agencies of other states or the federal government 
concerning a person’s use or possession of contraception, use of in vitro fertilization, pregnancy status or choice to get an  
abortion;  and 
• Modify the City’s zoning law so that reproductive health clinics may operate in more areas of San Francisco, including all floors in nonresidential districts and corner lots in residential districts.  
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote “yes,” you want City policy  and law  to support , protect and expand reproductive rights  and services.  
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want to make these changes.  
 


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Community Health and Medical Facilities, Street Safety, Public Spaces, and Shelter to Reduce Homelessness  Bond * 
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final  Digest  
On:   Friday , July 2 6, 2024  
Members:   Packard, Anderson, Wong , Troy,  Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now: The City provides and maintains public facilities and infrastructure .  
The City can issue voter -approved general obligation bonds to help fund these projects.    
The Citizens’ General Obligation Bond Oversight Committee reviews  how the bond proceeds are spent.   
The Proposal: Proposition ___  is a bond measur e that  would allow  the City to borrow up to $390 million by issuing general obligation 
bonds. The City would  fund:  
• up to $99.1 million to acquire or improve c ommunity health centers, including up to $71.1 million to seismically retrofit and 
renovate the Chinatown Public Health Center and up to $28 million to relocate the City Clinic;  
• up to $66 million to repair and renovate  Zuckerberg San Francisco  General Hospital and Trauma Center (General Hospital) 
and Laguna Honda Hospital  and Rehabilitation Center ; 
• up to $40 million to seismically retrofit General Hospital;  
• up to $63.9 million for  street  and sidewalk  safety projects;  
• up to $41 million to improv e and modernize public spaces in downtown San Francisco;  
• up to $25 million for Harvey Milk Plaza;  
• up to $5 million for park s and recreation centers ; and  
• up to $50 million for shelter or interim housing sites to reduce family homelessness.  
Proposition ___ would require the Citizens’ General Obligation Bond Oversight Committee to review how this bond money is spen t. 
City policy is to limit the amount of money it borrows by issuin g new bonds only as prior bonds are paid off.  If needed, a n increase in 
the property tax  rate would be allowed. Landlords would be permitted to pass through up to 50% of any resulting property tax increase  
to tenants . 
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote "yes," you want the City to issue up to $390 million in general obligation bonds to fund projects 
related to community health and medical facilities,  street safety,  public spaces and interim housing  to reduce family homelessness.  
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want the City to issue these bonds.  
 


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  First Responder Student Loan and Training Reimbursement Fund*  
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:    Final  Digest  
On:    Friday, August 2, 2024  
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  The City reimburses employees for some job- related educational and training expenses , but the City 
does not reimburse student loans for any of its employees.   
The City does not have a fund into which the Board of Supervisors (Board) and Mayor can put City money or  receive  private 
donations to reimburse  City employees’ student loans or job- related educational and training expenses.    
The Department of Human Resources oversees the hiring, development, support and retention of the City’s workforce.  
The Proposal:  Proposition __ would create a City fund dedicated to helping reimburse eligible employees for their student 
loans and job- related educational and training expenses  up to $25,000 . Only sworn members of the Police, Fire and 
Sheriff’s departments, paramedics,  Registered Nurses and 911 dispatchers, supervisors or coordinators who meet certain 
requirements would be eligible to receive payments from the fund.   
In the future, t he Board and the Mayor could decide to place City money into this fund, b ut the City wo uld not be required to 
do so.  The City could receive private donations in this fund.  
Proposition __ would allow the Department of Human Resources to create a program  to prov ide student loan and education 
and training reimbursement payments  up to $25,000 for each eligible employee. These payments would only begin once the 
fund contains at least $1,000,000  (one million dollars) . 
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote “yes,” you want to create a fund that the City could use  to help reimburse eligible City 
employees , including police officers, firefighters, sheriffs, paramedics, Registered N urses and 911 dispatchers , for student 
loans and education and training programs.  
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want to create this fund.  
 


*Working title,  for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Funding Rental Subsidies for Affordable Housing Developments Serving Low Income Seniors, Families, and 
Persons with Disabilities * 
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final  Digest  
On:    Friday, July 26, 2024  
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong, Troy, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  State law requires San Francisco to adequately plan to meet the housing needs of people at all income 
levels in the community . Low -income households in San Francisco have incomes that do not exceed 80% of area median 
income (AMI).  Extremely low -income (ELI) households  have incomes that do not exceed 35%  of AMI. 
  
The City provides loans to acquire, build or rehabilitate affordable housing to meet the needs of low -income households, but 
these loan programs do not fully subsidize the difference between the cost to operate these units and the rents ELI 
households can afford. As a result, relatively few housing units are offered at rents affordable to ELI households.  
The City funds rental subsidies for a limited number of affordable housing developments that make rental units available to ELI seniors. The City provides the funds directly to the owner to  subsidize the rents of ELI seniors.  
The City also provides rental subsidies for households that formerly experienced homelessness.  
Some of the funding for these two subsidy programs comes from state or federal grants and other funding comes from the 
General Fund through the annual budget process. There is currently no permanent funding source or annual commitment to 
fund these programs.  There are currently no equivalent programs for ELI families or persons with disabilities.  
The Mayor’s Office of Housing and Community Development (MOHCD), which coordinates the City’s affordable housing policies, administers these loan and rental subsidy programs.  
The Proposal: Proposition ___ is a Charter amendment that would create an Afford able Housing Opportunity Fund for Seniors, 
Families and Persons with Disabilities (Fund).   
 
Under Proposition ___, each year the City would be required to contribute to the Fund:  
 
• beginning in fiscal year 2026 -27, at least $8.25 million a year;  and 
 
• until fiscal year 2045 -46, at least the prior year amount , adjusted by up to 3% based on the City’s revenues . 
 
If, in any year the City’s projected budget deficit is $250 million or more, the City may reduce its  contribut ion to the Fund, provided that 
the City contributes at least $4 million in 2026- 27 and at least $8.25 million in each later year . 
 
Under Proposition __, MOHCD would administer the Fund by disbursing money to the owners  of certain new and existing affordable 
housing developments in San F rancisco to subsidize the rent of ELI  households consisting of seniors, families or persons with 
disabilities with income s up to 35% of AMI. The funds would subsidize the difference between the amount these tenants can afford and 
the rents  the owner would otherwise charge.  The Fund would end  on December 31, 2046, unless voters reauthorize it.  
 A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote "yes," you want to amend the Charter to appropriate  at least $8.25 million  a year to pay for rental 
subsidies for affordable housing developments serving ELI households of seniors, families and persons with disabilities.  
 
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want the City to make these changes.  
 


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Funding Programs Serving Children, Youth, and Families * 
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:    Final  Digest  
On:    Monday, July 29, 2024  
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong, Troy, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  The City funds services for children, youth and their families through the Children and Youth Fund, the 
Public Education Enrichment Fund and the Student Success Fund, and other programs.  
The San Francisco Unified School District (School District) is separate from the City and operates the San Francisco public school system . The School District receives  some  funding from the City . 
Children and Youth Fund  
The Children and Youth Fund supports services for children and youth through 24 years of age . The Charter requires the 
City to contribute a dedicated portion of annual  property tax revenues to this fund.  The City uses these funds to provide 
services,  including child care, health services, job training, social services, educational, recreational a nd cultural programs , 
and delinquency prevention services. The City must  spend more than the amount it spent in Fiscal Year 2000- 2001 to fund 
these services.  The amount spent in Fiscal Year 2000- 2001 is referred to as the “Children and Youth Fund Baseline.”  
Public Education Enrichment Fund  
The Public Education Enrichment Fund (PEEF) supports early childhood education programs a nd general education 
programs , including  art, music, sports and libraries. Th e Charter requires the City to contribute a certain amount to this fund 
each year, adjusted annually. The City must spend more than the amount it spent in Fiscal Year 2002- 2003  to fund these 
services. The amount spent in Fiscal Year 2002- 2003 is r eferred t o as the “PEEF Baseline.” In addition to the required 
PEEF funding, t he Board of Supervisors and Mayor may provide additional  funding to the School District.  
Student Success Fund  
The City grants money from the Student Success Fund to the School District and individual schools for programs that improve student academic achievement and social/emotional wellness. The Charter requires the City to contribute money to the fund each year through Fiscal Year 2037- 2038. In Fiscal Year 2024- 2025, the City must place $35 million into this fund. 
That amount will continue to increase each year, though the City may place less money in the fund under certain circumstances.  
The Proposal:  Proposition __ is a Charter amendment that would change the way the City evaluates funding for services to 
children, youth and their families  by monitoring outcomes .   
Proposition __ would create an Our Children, Our Families Initiative ( OCOF  Initiative ), led by the Mayor and the 
Superintendent of the School District and staffed by employees of the City and School District , to ensure that related funds 
are used effectively. This group would evaluate expenditures from the Children and Youth Fund and the PEEF and would prepare an annual report for  the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors , who must approve the se expenditures as part of the 
budget process.  
Proposition __ would require the School District  to report on PEEF funds and spending to the OCOF  Initiative  each year . 
Every five years, the School District must  submit a proposal describing how it plans to use these funds. The City’s future 
contributions to the School District from the PEEF depend on their review and approval of the School District’s proposal.  
Money spent from the Student Success Fund cannot repl ace money that is included or partially included in the Children and 
Youth Baseline, the PEEF Baseline or other similar provisions.   
Proposition __ would not change the minimum contributions by the City to the Children and Youth Fund, the PEEF or the 
Student Success Fund.  
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote "yes," you want to amend the Charter to create an Our Children, Our Families Initiative to 
ensure that related funds are used effectively.  
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want to make these changes.  
 


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Changes to Business Taxes*  
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final Digest  
On:    Friday, July 26, 2024  
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong, Troy, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  The City collects various business taxes annually,  including:  
• A gross receipts tax  that is a percentage of a business’s San Francisco gross receipts . Depending on business 
type, the City calculat es a business’s San Francisco gross receipts based on sales in San Fr ancisco, payroll 
expenses for employees working there, or both. Rates range from 0.053% to 1.008% and are scheduled to increase 
in coming years. Rates depend on business type, and higher rates apply as a business generates more gross 
receipts. For 2024, most small businesses with gross receipts up to $2.25 million are exempt.   
• A homelessness gross receipts tax that is an additional tax on business  activities with San Francisco gross receipts 
over $50 million. Rates range from 0.175% to 0.69%.  
• An overpaid executive gross receipts tax that is an additional tax on businesses that pay their highest -paid 
managerial employee much higher than the median compensation they pay their San Francisco employees. Rates are between 0.1% and 0.6%.  
• A business re gistration fee that is an additional tax. For most businesses , the fee is currently between $47 and 
$45,150, based on business type and amount of gross receipts.  
• An administrative office tax that is a tax on payroll expenses paid by certain large businesses instead of these other 
business taxes. The combined rates in 2024 range from 3.04% to 5.44%, and in 2025 are scheduled to range from 3.11% to 5.51%. Business registration fees for these businesses currently range from $19,682 to $45,928.  
State law limits  the total revenue that the City may spend each year. The voters may approve increases to this spending 
limit for up to four years.  
 
The Proposal:  The proposed measure would change the City’s business taxes to:  
• For the gross receipts tax:  
o exempt most small businesses with gross receipts up to $5 million (increased by inflation).  
o reduc e the number of business types from 14 to seven;  
o calculate San Francisco gross receipts based more on sales and less on payroll expenses , depending on 
the type of business;  
o change rates to between 0.1% and 3.716%; and  
• Apply the homelessness gross receipts tax on business  activities  with San Francisco gross receipts over $25 
million, at rates between 0.162% and 1.64%.  
• Modify how the City c alculates the overpaid executive gross receipts tax , determine who pays that tax, and set  the 
rates between 0.02% and 0.129%.  
• Adjust business registration fees to between $55 and $60,000 (increased by inflation).  
• Adjust the administrative office tax rates for certain large businesses to range from 2.97% to 3.694% , and adjust the 
business registration fees for these businesses  to between $500 and $35,000 (increased by inflation).  
• Make administrative changes to the City’s business taxes.  
The homelessness gross receipts tax would continue to fund homelessness prevention and services for people 
experiencing homelessness . 
The City would use the o ther taxes mentioned above for general government purposes.  
All these taxes would apply indefinit ely until repealed.  
This proposal would increase the City’s spending limit for four years.  
If Proposition ___ passes with more votes than Proposition ___, then Proposition __ would have no legal effect.  
 
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote "yes," you want to change the following taxes the City collects from businesses: the gross 
receipts tax, the homelessness gross receipts tax, the overpaid executive gross receipts tax , the administrative office tax  
and business registration fees.  
 
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you v ote “no,” you do not want to change the City’s business taxes.  
 


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Inspector General *  
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final  Digest  
On:    Friday, August 2, 2024  
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  The Controller is appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of Supervisors to oversee the 
City’s financial affairs. The Charter requires the Controller to receive and investigate complaints concerning the quality and delivery of government services , wasteful or inefficient City government practices, misuse of City funds, and improper 
activities by City officers and employees. The Charter also requires the Controller to monitor the level and effectiveness of  
services the City provides to its resident s.  
Other City departments, including the City Attorney, District Attorney and Ethics Commission,  have jurisdiction to investigate 
fraud, abuse and other matters related to public integrity. The Department of Human Resources has jurisdiction to investigate employee misconduct.  
The Controller can examine the records of City boards, commissions, officers and departments, but the Controller cannot issue subpoenas to require third parties such as City contractors, permittees or lobbyists to produce records. State law authorizes employees of the Controller’s Office to execute search warrants under certain circumstances, but there is no similar provision in the Charter.  
The Charter also establishes a separate department called the Sheriff’s Department Office of In spector General to 
investigate complaints involving employees of the Sheriff’s Office. That department is not connected to the Controller’s Office.  
The Proposal:  Proposition __ would amend the Charter to create a new position of Inspector General in the Controller’s 
Office to review and investigate complaints of  fraud, waste and abuse. The Controller would appoint  the Inspector General , 
subject to the approval of  the Mayor and Board of Supervisors . The Controller would supervise and could terminate  the 
Inspector General.  
The Inspector General would consult with the Ethics Commission, City Attorney, District Attorney and Department of Human 
Resources regarding those departments’ investigati ons involving fraud, waste or abuse. The Inspector General could either  
refer specific matters to those departments , could  investigate those matters in coordination with the relevant department , or 
could conduct its own investigation . At least twice a year, t he Inspector General would be required to issue public reports on 
its activities and the outcomes of all investigations  by other city agencies into matters concerning public integrity . 
Proposition __ would give the Controller power to issue subpoenas to third  parties, including contractors, permittees and 
lobbyists.  It would also allow the Inspector General, the Controller and employees of the Controller’s Office to execute 
search warrants when permitted  by State law.  
Under Proposition _ _, the Sher iff’s Depart ment Office of Inspector G eneral  would be renamed the “Office of Sheriff’s 
Inspector General. ” 
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote "yes," you want to create the new position of Inspector General in the Controller’s Office 
to review and investigate complaints of fraud, waste and abuse, and grant the Controller’s Office the power to issue 
subpoenas and execute search warrants when permitted by State law . 
 A "NO" Vote M eans:  If you vote “no,” you do not want to make these changes.  
 


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Schools Improvement and  Safety Bond*  
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final  Digest  
On:   Friday, July 26, 2024  
Members:   Packard, Anderson, Wong, Troy, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now: The San Francisco Unified School District (School District) operates the San Francisco public school system and 
educates more than 49,500 students from pre -kindergarten through 12th grade. The School District builds , repairs and maintains  its 
facilities, primarily using funds  from voter -approved bond measures,  as well as  from local parcel taxes and developer fees .  
 
In order to issue general obligation bonds, the School District must provide voters with a list of types of project s on which the funds will 
be spent . 
 
Under State law, school districts cannot use bond funds for teacher and administrator salaries or operating expenses.  
 The most recent school bond was approved by voters in 2016. Property tax revenues are used to pay the pr incipal and interest on 
general obligation bonds.  
 The Proposal: Proposition ___ would authorize the School District to borrow up to $790 million by issuing general obligation bonds. 
The School District may use these bond funds to improve, repair and upgrade any of its sites to:  
 
• address health and safety risks by makin g seismic upgrades, improving accessibility for people with disabilities, fixing 
damaged buildings and removing hazardous materials;
 
 
• repair and replace major building systems, including electrical, heating, water, sewer, lighting, security and fire sprink ler 
systems;  
 
• modify building interiors, such as classrooms, and exteriors, including playgrounds, fences and gates, fields and bleachers, 
and landscaping;  
 
• add or expand existing classrooms or school buildings, including portable classrooms and transition al kindergarten facilities ; 
 
• upgrade security and technology infrastructure ;  
 
• build or renovate common, administrative or athletic areas, such as kitchens, student nutrition facilities, theaters, auditor iums, 
gymnasiums, locker rooms, offices, transportat ion facilities and infrastructure, warehouses, and buildings and grounds 
facilities;  
 
• construct a new central  food hub ; 
 
• replace temporary classroom facilities with permanent structures;  
 
• perform work necessary to comply with  applicable codes or regulations.  
 
The School District would be required to create an independent citizens' oversight committee to  review  and report on  the use of these 
bond funds .  
 
Proposition ___ may require an increase in the property tax to pay principal and interest on t he bonds. This measure requires the 
approval of 55% of the votes cast.  
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote "yes," you want the School District to issue up to $790 million in general obligation bonds to improve, 
repair and upgrade School District sites, and to build  new facilities.  
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want the School District to issue these bonds.  
 


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Retirement Benefits for Nurses and 911 Operators*  
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final  Digest  
On:    Friday, August 2, 2024  
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong,  Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  The City provides its employees with pension benefits through the San Francisco Employees’ 
Retirement System (SFERS).  
SFERS determines the pension payment a retiree receives under each plan through a calculation based on the employee’s final compensation, years of service and age at retirement. That calculation varies between plans.  
 SFERS provides different plans for employees based on job type, including:  
• Miscellaneous Plans for 911 dispatchers and their supervisors and coordinators , as well as most other City 
employees ;  
• Safety Plans for uniformed employees of the Police Department and Fire Department; and 
• A Miscellaneous Safety Plan for certain probation officers, District Attorney investigators and juvenile court 
counselors . 
In general , retirees receive greater pension benefits under the Safety Plans and the Miscellaneous Safety Plan than they 
do under the Miscellaneous Plans.  Although 911 dispatchers are classified as First Responders in California, they do not 
receive Safety -level retirement pensions.   
City employees contribute a percentage of their salary toward their retirement benefits. In some circumstances, employees may also purchase service credits to increase their pension benefits.   
A “per diem nurse” is a R egistered Nurse employed by the City on an occasional and temporary basis. Since 1988, per 
diem nurses have not been members of SFERS and do not receive any pension service credit for the hours they work on a per diem basis.  
The Proposal:  Proposition __ would allow eligible Registered Nurses to pur chase service credit for hours they worked on a 
per diem basis. Registered Nurses who are or become members of SFERS and have worked an average of 32 hours or 
more per week for at least one year could purchase up to three years of service credit for time t hey previously worked solely 
as per diem nurses for the City before they became members of SFERS.  
Proposition __ would also move 911 dispatchers, supervisors and coordinators from the Miscellaneous Plans to the Miscellaneous Safety Plan for compensation th ose employees earn on and after January 4, 2025. As members of the 
Miscellaneous Safety Plan, these employees would be required to pay an increased amount into the pension plan and would receive increased pension benefits at retirement.   
A "YES" Vote Mean s: If you vote “yes,” you want to allow R egistered Nurses who are members of the San Francisco 
Employees’ Retirement System and meet certain requirements  to purchase credits toward their total pension years of 
service for time previously worked as per diem nurses , and to allow 911 dispatchers, supervisors and coordinators to 
increase their pension benefits by joining the SFERS Miscellaneous Safety Plan for time worked starting in January 2025.  
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want to make these changes.  


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  City Commissions and Mayoral Authority * 
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final  Digest  
On:    Monday , July 2 9, 2024  
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong, Troy, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  The City currently has about 130 appointed boards, commissions and advisory bodies (commissions).  
Of the 130 commissions, 44 are established in the C harter and can be changed only by the voters.  The rest of the 
commissions are created by ordinance and typically may be amended or deleted by act of the Board of Supervisors (Board) . 
Under current law:  
• There is no limit on how many commissions the City may have.   
• Many commissions have decision- making authority. Others are merely advisory. Some decide appeals and other 
administrative proceedings.  
• Some commissions oversee and set policy for City departments. These commissions generally nominate candidates to serve as department head. The Mayor has authority to appoint the department head solely from the candidates the com mission nominates. Generally, only the commission has authority to remove the department 
head.  
• For many commissions, the Mayor appoints at least a majority of its members and the Board appoints the res t. The 
Mayor’s appointments are generally subject to B oard confirmation or rejection.   
• The Mayor and Board may remove members from some commissions only for official misconduct.  
• The City  pays members of some commissions .  
• The City  provides members of some commissions with health care benefits.  
• The Police Commission adopts rules governing police officers’ conduct.  
The Proposal:  The proposed measure would make these changes to the City Charter:  
• Limit the City to a total of 65 commis sions.  
• Retain 20 Charter  commissions, including  Police, Fire, Recreation and Park, Municipal Transportation Agency, 
Public Utilities  and Ethics , and those  overseeing employee health benefits and retirement. The measure would also 
allow the City to retain commissions that are required by federal or state law . 
• Remove 24 Charter commissions,  including Public Health, Library, H uman Rights, Human Services, Arts, 
Environment, Small Business and Juvenile Probation, subject to  the City reauthorizing or restructuring them within 
the 65- commission limit. The Board could later reestablish these bodies as advisory commissions by ordinance.  
• Establish a five-member task force that would recommend within nine months which commissions should be 
reauthorized or restructured  or dissolved to stay within the 65- commission limit . This task force would be appointed 
by the Mayor, the President of the B oard, the Controller, the City Administrator and the City Attorney.  
• The Board could by ordinance reauthorize or restructure those commissions within the 16- month period after the 
measure’s effective date to prevent them from being dissolved . The Board could later reestablish and create new 
commissions, subject to the 65- commission limit.   
• Require that any commissions the Board reauthorizes, restructures or creates could only advise the Board and 
Mayor, and have no decision -making authority except as mandat ed by state or federal law. Decision -making 
authority would transfer from commissioners to department heads. Authority to decide appeals and other 
proceedings would transfer to hearing officers.  
• Allow the Mayor to appoint , without Board revi ew, at least two -thirds of the members of reauthorized, restructured 
or new commissions , and some retained commissions. The Board would have authority to appoint up to one- third 
of the members of those commissions. T he Board and Mayor could each remove the members they appoint for 
any lawful reason.  
Proposition __ also would:  
• Prohibit the City from paying commissioners or providing them  with health  care benefits.   
• Give the Mayor sole authority to appoint and remove most City department heads.   
• Give the Police Chief sole authority to adopt rules governing police officers’ conduct.  The Police Commission 
would retain authority to discipline police officers  and retain oversight over the Department of Police Account ability . 
If Proposition ___ passes with more votes than Proposition ___, then Proposition __ would have no legal effect.  
A "YES" Vote Means : If you vote "yes," you want to limit the total number of commissions the City may have to 65,  give the 
Mayor  sole authority to appoint and remove City department heads, and give the Police Chief sole authority to adopt rules 
governing police officers’ conduct.  
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want to make these changes.  
 


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Police Staffing and Deferred Retirement * 
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final  Digest  
On:    Friday, August 2, 2024  
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  The Police Commission (Commission) oversees the San Francisco Police Department (Department). 
The Charter requires the Chief of the Department (Police Chief) to submit a report every two years to the Commission. This report describes  the current number of full -duty sworn officers and recommends adequate  staffing levels of full -duty sworn 
officers for the next two years. The Commission must consider this report and recommendation when it approves the Department’s budget.   
The Charter does not define “full -duty sworn officers.”  
The San Francisco Employee Retirement System is the retirement and pension system for City employees. Under the Charter, police officers are eligible for retirement benefits, with pension payments based on their compensation, age and 
length of service. The Charter does not allow Cit y employees, including police officers, to continue working full  time for the 
City after retirement. But the City may rehire retired City employees to work a limited number of hours each year while they 
also collect retirement benefits.  
The Proposal:  Proposition __ would amend the Charter to define “full -duty sworn officer” to mean a full -time officer except 
those  on long- term leaves of absence, recruit s who are training at the Police Academy  and officers  assigned to the San 
Francisco Interna tional Airport. To reduce the administrative burden, t he measure would require the Police Chief to provide 
a report every three years, instead of two, on current full -duty sworn officers and recommend future staffing to the 
Commission. The Commission would report  annually  to the Board of Supervisors (Board) on the Department’s progress on 
meeting its staffing goals , including its goal of increasing the representation of women in the Department  to 30% of new 
recruits by 2030.  
Proposition ___ would establish a Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP) for eligible police officers. Full -duty police 
officers in the ranks of Officer, Sergeant and Inspector who are at least 50 years old and have at least 25 years of eligible 
service  with the Department or another law enforcement agency could participate. Participants would continue to work full -
time for the Department at their current salary and benefi t levels . Participants must agree to perform neighborhood patrol  
work or conduct investigations, regardless of their previous assignment. Participants would only be allowed to participate for 
up to five years. The pension payments the participant would have collected upon retirement would be placed into a tax -
deferred and interest -bearin g account. When their DROP period  ends,  participants must stop work for the City and would 
receive their deferred monthly pension payments with interest. The Board could limit the number of DROP participants.   
Proposition _ authorizes the DROP program for  an initial five -year period. Thereafter, the Board would have the authority to 
continue the program every five years until it expires.  
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote “yes,” you want to amend the Charter to define “full-duty sworn officer ”; require the Police 
Chief to make a report and recommend future staffing of full -duty sworn officers to the Police Commission every three years 
instead of two;  require the Commission to report annually to the Board on Department staffing; and create a five -year 
program  with possible renewals allowing police officers to continue working for the Department after retiring, with pension 
payments deferred while they are working.  
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want to make these changes.  
 


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Retirement Benefits for Firefighters * 
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:    Final  Digest  
On:    Friday, August 2, 2024  
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  The City provides its employees with pension benefits through the San Francisco Employees’ 
Retirement System (SFERS). Employees who meet age and service requirements receive pension payments upon retirement. Members of the Fire Department are eligible to retire at age 50 if they have at least five ye ars of credit  for City 
service.     
A member’s pension generally increases with the member’s age, compensation and number of years worked.  The pension 
is a percentage of the member’s final compensation at retirement. SFERS calculat es that percentage based on the 
member’s age at retirement and their number of years of City service. No member of the Fire Department may receive a pension that is more than 90% of their final compensation.   
Members of the Fire Department hired before January 7, 2012, could reach the 90% maximum percentage for their pension 
at age 55. Members hired on or after January 7, 2012, could reach that maximum three years later, at age 58.   
The Proposal:  Proposition __ would amend the Charter to change pension benefits for members o f the Fire Department 
hired on or after January 7, 2012.  Proposition _ _ would lower from 58 to 55 the age at which these members can obtain the 
highest pension based on age.  These changes would make pension benefits for members hired on and after January  7, 
2012,  the same as benefits for members hired before January 7, 2012.  
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote “yes,” you want to amend the Charter to change how pension benefits are calculated for 
members of the Fire Department hired on or after January 7, 2012,  by lowering the age these members can receive  the 
highest pension  from 58 to 55, and make those benefits the same as members hired before January 7, 2012.  
 
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want to make these changes.  


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Additional Business Tax on Transportation Network Companies and Autonomous Vehicle Businesses * 
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final  Digest  
On:    Friday, August 2, 2024  
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  The City collects taxes on gross receipts from many  businesses in San Francisco ( Gross Receipts 
Tax). For most businesses, the G ross Receipts Tax rate is between 0.053% and 1.008% of San Francisco gross receipts, 
with some rates scheduled to increase in coming years.  
The City imposes a per -ride tax on certain transportation businesses that provide prearranged rides  that originate in San 
Francisco . This tax applies to transportation network companies , which connect drivers to passengers , and businesses 
providing rides in some types of autonomous vehicles . Transportation network companies do not include taxi or limousine 
services. The rates for that tax are between 1.5% and 3.25% of the fares attributable to passenger rides within San 
Francisco.  
 Autonomous vehicles can operate without a human driver and some can transport passengers.  
The San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency operates a public transportation system (Muni) of buses, light rail 
vehicles, streetcars and cable cars.  
State law limits the total revenue that the City may spend each year. The voters may approve increases to this spending limit for up to four years.  
The Proposal:  In addition to existing taxes, t he proposed measure would create a new gross receipts tax on transportation 
network companies and autonomous vehicle businesses. This new tax would be on passenger transportation service gross 
receipts in San Francisco above $500,000. The tax rates would be:  
• 1% on taxable gross receipts between $500,000.01 and $1,000,000 (one million dollars) ;  
• 2.5% on taxable gross receipts between $1,000,000.01 and $2,500,000 (two-and-a-half million dollars) ; 
• 3.5% on taxable gross receipts between $2,500,000.01 and $25,000,000 (twenty -five million dollars) ; and 
• 4.5% on taxable gross receipts over $25,000,000  (twenty -five million dollars) . 
The City would use the funds it collects from the new tax to:  
• Preserve, maintain or increase Muni  public transportation services;   
• Improve or preserve Muni  service to public schools, libraries and parks by increasing service frequency , expanding 
and adding new routes; and 
• Maintain or expand discount fare or fare- free programs by Muni  for people with disabilities, seniors, youth, students 
and low -income passengers.  
The tax would remain in place unless the voters repeal it through a future ballot measure. The Board of Supervisors would have authority to amend the tax by a two -thirds vote, so long as it does not undermine the intent  of the tax.  
This proposal would also increase the City’s spending limit for four years.  
If Proposition ___ [Changes to Business Taxes] passes with more votes than Proposition ___ [this measure], then 
Proposition __ [this measure] would have no legal effect.   
If Proposition ___ [this measure] passes with more votes than Proposition ___ [Changes to Business Taxes], both propositions w ould have legal effect.  
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote "yes," you want to create a new gross receipts tax on transportation network companies 
and autonomous vehicle businesse s that provide passenger service for compensation and use the funds the City collects 
from the tax to support  Muni transportation services and fare discount programs . 
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want to make these changes.  
 


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Creating a Task Force to Recommend Changing, Eliminating or Combining City Commissions * 
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final  Digest  
On:    Monday , July 2 9, 2024  
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong, Troy, Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  The City currently has about 130 boards, commissions and advisory bodies (commissions) that make 
policy and other decisions for the City or provide nonbinding advice to City officials and departments.  Most City 
commissions that are created by ordinance do not have the authority to make City decisions and instead provide nonbinding 
advice to City departments and officials.  
Members of the Board of Supervisors (Board), the Mayor and City departments have authority to introduce an ordinance, 
which must be approved by a majority of the Board. The Mayor  has authority to veto it . Voters may also approve an 
ordinance and require their approval for any change to a voter -approved ordinance.   
Other commissions are established by Charter amendm ent. Only voters may amend the Charter. Most of these Charter 
commissions oversee City departments and have authority to set City policy and make binding decisions.  
The Proposal:  Proposition __ is a Charter amendment that would create  a Commission Streamlining Task Force (Task 
Force) to review the structure of the City’s commissions  and recommend  to the Mayor and the Board by February 1, 2026, 
how the City could change, eliminate or consolidate  commissions to improve the administration of City government.  
The Task Force would include five members:  
• the City Administrator  or a designated employee of their department;  
 
• the Controller  or a designated employee  of their department ;   
 
• the City Attorney or a designated employee  of their department ;     
 
• a public sector  organized labor representative appointed by the President of the Board; and  
 
• a person with expertise  in open and accountable government appointed by the Mayor.  
Proposition __ would also require the Board’s Budget  and Legislative Analyst to prepare a report on how much it cost s the 
City to support each current commission, and how much it would save if certain commission s were eliminated or 
consolidated.   
Proposition __ would authorize the Task Force to implement its recommendations in these ways:  
• If the Task Force recommends changes to commissions established by ordinance, the Task Force may introduce 
ordinances to make those changes.  
• Any ordinance the Task Force introduces would take effect 90 days after introduction unless the Board rejects it by supermajority vote of at least eight members.  
• If the Task Fo rce recommends changes to commissions established by voter -approved ordinance, those changes 
may also require voter approval at a future election before the City may implement them.  
• If the Task Force recommends changes to commissions established by Charter  amendment , the City Attorney 
would be required to prepare a Charter amendment implementing these  recommendations for the Board to consider 
placing on the ballot for a future election.   
The Task Force will end  24 months after its first meeting.  
If Proposition ___ passes with more votes than Proposition ___, then Proposition __ would have no legal effect.  
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote "yes," you want to create a Task Force with authority to make recommendations by 
February 1, 2026 , on ways the City  could change, eliminate or co nsolidat e commissions to improve the administration of 
City government; require a financial report on the City’s commissions; and give the Task Force authority to introduce 
ordinances to implement its recommendations , and if n ecessary, require  the City Attorney to draft Charter amendment s to 
submit to voters at a future election.  
 A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want to make these changes.  
 


*Working title, for identification only. The Director of Elections determines the title of each local ballot measure; measure 
titles are not considered during Ballot Simplification Committee meetings.  Reserving the Upper Great Highway as Public Open Recreation Space*  
Digest by the Ballot Simplification Committee  
 
Status:   Final Digest  
On:    Friday , July 2 6, 2024 
Members:    Packard, Anderson, Wong, Troy , Wang  
 
The Way It Is Now:  In response to the COVID -19 pandemic, the City closed certain public streets to private motor vehicles, 
reserving the streets as public open space for recreational purposes. These closures included the Great Highway between Lincoln Way and Sloat Boulevard (Upper Great Highway) , adjacent to Ocean Beach.  
In May 2022, the City replaced the pandemic restrictions on the Upper Great Highway with a pilot program closing the 
Upper Great Highway to private  motor vehicles on Friday afternoons, weekends and holidays.  The closure does not apply to 
emergency vehicles, official government vehicles, intra- park transit shuttle buses and similar vehicles authorized to 
transport people. This pilot program is scheduled to end on December 31, 2025. When the pilot program ends, the Upper 
Great Highway will be open to private  motor vehicles.  
The City’s General Plan sets objectives and policies for land uses within San Francisco, including streets. The California 
Coastal Act guides land uses along the California coas t. Changes in use to the Upper Great Highway may require 
amendments to the General Plan and approvals under the California Coastal Act.  
The Recreation and Parks Commission has jurisdiction over  most public parks and other recreational facilities in San 
Francisco , including the Upper Great Highway . Under the Commission’s direction, the Recreation and Parks’ General 
Manager overse es the use of those recreational facilities.  
The Proposal:  Proposition ___ is an ordinance that would allow the City to use the  Upper Great Highway for public open 
recreation space, permanently closing it to private motor vehicles seven days a week, with limited exceptions. It would  
continue to allow emergency vehicles, official government vehicles, intra- park transit shuttle buses  and similar  authorized 
vehicles to access the Upper Great Highway at all times. The General Manager of the Recreation and Parks Department 
would have the authority to determ ine an emergency exists and  allow p rivate  motor vehicles to use the Upper Great 
Highway . 
Proposition __ would require,  within 180 days of voter approval of this measure, the City to seek any other approvals 
necessary to permanently close the Upper Great Highway to private  motor vehicles. Those approvals may include 
amendments to the City’s General Plan and approvals under the California Coastal Act.  
If Proposition ___ is passed by voters, the current pilot program would remain in place until all nec essary approvals are 
obtained and permits granted, or, until the pilot program is scheduled to e nd on December 31, 2025.   
A "YES" Vote Means:  If you vote “yes,” you want the City to use the Upper Great Highway as public open recreation 
space, permanently closing it to p rivate  motor vehicles seven days a week , with  limited exceptions.  
A "NO" Vote Means:  If you vote “no,” you do not want the City to make these changes.   
 


38 | Title and Summary / AnalysisPROPOSITION RAISES MINIMUM WAGE. 
INITIATIVE STATUTE.32
OFFICIAL TITLE AND SUMMARY PREPARED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
BACKGROUND
State and Local Laws Set Minimum Wages. 
Employers must pay their workers at least the 
minimum wage. California’s minimum wage 
currently is $16 per hour. Some local governments 
have higher minimum wages. Minimum wage 
laws do not apply to independent contractors and 
other self-employed people.
Inflation Adjustments Under Current Law. Prices 
tend to go up over time. These rising prices are 
called “inflation. ” The state adjusts its minimum 
wage every year based on inflation. Each 
adjustment matches U.S. inflation, except in 
two cases:
• If inflation is negative, the adjustment is zero.
• If inflation exceeds 3.5 percent, the 
adjustment is 3.5 percent.
State Sets Higher Minimum Wages for Some 
Employers. State laws set higher minimum wages 
for employers in some industries. For example, 
most fast food restaurants must pay their workers 
at least $20 per hour.PROPOSAL
Higher Minimum Wage in 2025. In 2025, 
California would have different minimum wages 
for employers of different sizes. Employers with 
26 or more employees would have a minimum 
wage of $18 per hour. Employers with 25 or 
fewer employees would have a minimum wage 
of $17 per hour.  Without Proposition 32, the 
minimum wage for all employees would be about 
$16.50 per hour. The proposition would not 
change any local or industry-specific minimum 
wages.
Minimum Wage $18 Per Hour in 2026. In 2026, 
the minimum wage would be $18 per hour for all 
employees. Without Proposition 32, it likely would 
be about $17 per hour.
Inflation Adjustments Paused Until 2027. The 
minimum wage would be adjusted for inflation 
every year starting in 2027. These adjustments 
would follow the current rules described earlier.• California’s minimum wage is currently $16 per 
hour. This measure increases that minimum, as 
follows:  
• Employers with 26 or more employees would 
pay $17 hourly for the remainder of 2024 
and $18 hourly beginning on January 1, 
2025. 
• Employers with 25 or fewer employees would 
pay $17 hourly beginning January 1, 2025, 
and $18 hourly beginning January 1, 2026. 
• Thereafter, as existing law provides, the 
minimum wage annually adjusts for inflation.
• In addition to the generally applicable minimum 
wage described above, current laws establish 
a higher minimum wage in specified industries. 
This measure does not amend those laws.SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE ANALYST’S ESTIMATE 
OF NET STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT FISCAL 
IMPACT: 
• State and local government costs could 
increase or decrease. This change likely would 
not exceed the high hundreds of millions of 
dollars annually.
• State and local tax revenues likely would 
decrease. This revenue loss likely would not 
exceed a few hundred million dollars annually.
ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYSTThe text of this measure can be found on page 97 and the Secretary of State’s website at 
voterguide.sos.ca.gov.
32
For the full text of Proposition 32, see page 97.  Analysis | 39ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
FISCAL EFFECTS
Fiscal Effects Depend on Economic Effects. 
Proposition 32 could have a wide range of 
economic effects:
• Higher Wages. Workers who would have 
made less than $18 per hour would instead 
make $18 or more per hour by 2026. Higher 
minimum wages also tend to push up wages 
for other workers. This means that many 
workers making a bit more than $18 per hour 
also likely would get a raise.
• Likely Higher Prices. Higher wages would 
increase costs for many businesses. Some 
businesses likely would charge customers 
higher prices. The overall price increase from 
Proposition 32 likely would be smaller than 
one-half of 1 percent.
• Likely Lower Profits. The costs of higher 
wages likely would reduce some businesses’ 
profits.
• Effect on Jobs. The number of jobs in the 
state could go up or down. This change 
likely would be smaller than one-quarter of 1 
percent.
Government Costs Could Go Up or Down. 
Proposition 32 would increase state and local 
government costs in some ways but would 
decrease them in other ways:
• Higher Government Costs to Pay for 
Workers. The state and many local 
governments would have higher costs to pay 
their employees. They also would have higher 
costs to pay for work done by workers who 
are not their employees. 
• Savings From Lower Enrollment in 
Health and Human Services Programs. 
Proposition 32 would change the number 
of people enrolled in health and human services programs (such as California’s 
Medicaid program, Medi-Cal) because it 
would change people’s incomes. These 
enrollment changes likely would reduce state 
and local government costs.
Combining these two pieces, total state and local 
government costs could go up or down. This 
change likely would not exceed the high hundreds 
of millions of dollars each year (annually). (Total 
state and local government spending in California 
exceeds $500 billion annually.)
The change in costs to the state’s General Fund 
likely would be less than one-half of 1 percent 
of the state’s total General Fund budget. (The 
General Fund is the account the state uses to pay 
for most public services, including education, 
health care, and prisons.)
Lower Revenues. Proposition 32 would affect 
income tax and sales tax revenues because it 
would change incomes and prices. Overall, the 
proposition likely would reduce state and local 
government revenues. Revenues would be lower 
mainly due to lower incomes for business owners. 
The net revenue loss likely would not exceed a 
few hundred million dollars annually. Last year, 
total state and local revenue from these taxes was 
about $200 billion.
Visit sos.ca.gov/campaign-lobbying/cal-access-
resources/measure-contributions/2024-
ballot-measure-contribution-totals for a list 
of committees primarily formed to support or 
oppose this measure.
Visit fppc.ca.gov/transparency/
top-contributors.html 
to access the committee’s top 10 contributors. RAISES MINIMUM WAGE. 
INITIATIVE STATUTE.PROPOSITION
32
32
32
40 | Arguments Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency. PROPOSITION RAISES MINIMUM WAGE.  
INITIATIVE STATUTE.32
★ ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 32  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 32  ★
VOTE NO on PROPOSITION 32!
Ballot measures shouldn’t be toys for multimillionaires. 
ONE PERSON ALONE—A MULTIMILLIONAIRE—IS 
BEHIND PROP. 32. 
One person alone wrote Prop. 32, spent millions getting it 
on the ballot, and wrote the argument for Prop. 32. 
SMALL BUSINESS AND WORKING FAMILY ADVOCATES 
DON’T WANT PROP. 32 
Many of California’s leading voices for working families 
and small businesses didn’t even want Prop. 32 on the 
ballot, but this one author had to have it his way.
Even leading advocates for higher minimum wages urged 
him to pull Prop. 32 from the ballot. He refused. 
One person shouldn’t try to dictate labor policy for 
39 million Californians, with the only qualification that he’s 
rich. No wonder Prop. 32 is so flawed. 
Prop. 32 forces small businesses to INCREASE PRICES, 
adding to inflation and raising the cost of living in 
California even more. That hurts working families! Prop. 32 raises costs for state and local governments 
by BILLIONS, meaning they’ll cut vital services and 
raise taxes. 
Prop. 32 COSTS JOBS, with the greatest impact on teens 
and people of color who are trying to get a career started 
with entry level jobs. That’s why leaders across California 
who previously supported minimum wage increases have 
changed course and asked for them to be slowed down. 
And Prop. 32 worsens California’s increasingly complex 
patchwork of minimum wage laws, confusing both workers 
and small business owners. 
Prop. 32 seems to be an ego project, not a real solution for 
working Californians. 
Get the facts at StopProp32.com. 
VOTE NO ON PROPOSITION 32! 
Jot Condie, President
California Restaurant Association
Jennifer Barrera, President
California Chamber of Commerce
Ron Fong, President
California Grocers AssociationEvery Californian who works at least a full-time, 40-hour 
work week should be able to afford life’s basic needs. 
However, there are about 2 million Californians who are 
working full time, and more, but earn less than $18 per 
hour. Most of these Californians who earn less than $18 
per hour are heads of their households. Most of these 
Californians who earn less than $18 per hour have kids. 
We can all agree that Californians who work hard, working 
full time or more, should not live in poverty. But that’s 
exactly how millions of Californians are living because 
their wages are too low to afford how expensive life has 
become in California. 
In addition, when people who work hard are paid wages 
that aren’t enough to cover life’s basic needs, a bigger 
burden is put on taxpayers to make up the difference 
that some corporations aren’t honoring. It is wrong for 
all the businesses that do right by their workers that 
some corporations are allowed to pay Californians such 
low wages that those workers are left needing taxpayer 
funded aid. Taxpayers should not be subsidizing some 
corporations that choose to pay extremely low wages  
and enabling them to keep the rest as excess profit for 
their owners. By raising the minimum wage to $18 per hour, 
Proposition 32 will bring a much-needed raise to 2 million 
California workers and create a more prosperous system 
where big corporations aren’t allowed to exploit smaller 
businesses, our communities, and our hardest working 
neighbors. 
Finally, when more Californians earn a fair wage for their 
work, our entire economy does better. Working people 
are better able to afford their rent, provide three meals 
per day for their kids, and all of that spending boosts 
the economies of our local communities. That boosted 
spending creates more jobs in our communities, which 
makes everyone better off. 
It’s time that we make California a place that working 
families can afford. By raising the minimum wage to $18, 
Proposition 32 will directly better the lives of 2 million 
Californians who will get a raise and we will stimulate more 
spending in our communities that most need that boost. 
That boost will create more jobs and more prosperity  
for everyone.
VOTE YES ON PROP. 32!
Joe Sanberg, Anti-Poverty Advocate
32
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.  Arguments | 41★ ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 32  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 32  ★
YES on PROPOSITION 32 means a RAISE for SERVICE, 
ESSENTIAL, AND OTHER WORKERS to help them afford 
life’s basic needs. 
YES ON PROPOSITION 32 means a RAISE for SINGLE 
MOMS to help them afford life’s basic needs. 
YES ON PROPOSITION 32 means CLOSING THE GENDER 
PAY GAP for over a million working women. 
The goods and services you buy have become more 
expensive because CORPORATIONS ARE MAKING 
RECORD PROFITS! CORPORATE PROFIT MARGINS 
HAVE INCREASED 100% since the year 2000. The STOCK 
MARKET has repeatedly made ALL-TIME HIGHS this year. 
CORPORATE LOBBYISTS who will MAKE MORE MONEY 
BY KEEPING WAGES LOW are trying to convince you that 
raising the minimum wage will increase the cost of living, but that’s false. Record corporate profit margins are what 
has increased the cost of living. Now, we have to RAISE 
THE MINIMUM WAGE TO HELP SERVICE WORKERS, 
ESSENTIAL WORKERS, SINGLE MOMS, and other 
WORKING CALIFORNIANS to be able to AFFORD LIFE’S 
BASIC NEEDS.  
YES on PROP. 32! 
Learn more at: livingwageact.com 
Ada F. Briceño, Co-President
UNITE HERE Local 11 
Nanette Barragán, Congresswoman
U.S. House of Representatives, California 44th District
Saru Jayaraman, President
One Fair WageVOTE NO on PROPOSITION 32.
PROPOSITION 32 INCREASES YOUR PERSONAL COSTS; 
MAKES CALIFORNIA’S HUGE BUDGET DEFICIT WORSE; 
PUNISHES SMALL BUSINESSES; COSTS JOBS; AND 
HURTS THE VERY WORKERS IT’S SUPPOSED TO HELP.
PROPOSITION 32 MAKES OUR BUDGET DEFICIT WORSE 
BY BILLIONS EACH YEAR AND JEOPARDIZES FUNDING 
FOR PUBLIC SAFETY AND EDUCATION 
California just experienced a $50 billion budget deficit. 
Many cities and counties face huge deficits as well. The 
independent fiscal analysis of Prop. 32 in this same ballot 
pamphlet says a minimum wage increase will likely cost 
state and local governments billions of dollars EACH 
YEAR. 
That means two things. You paying higher taxes to make 
up the difference and cuts to important programs like 
K–12 education, public safety, healthcare, and getting 
homeless people off the streets. 
PROPOSITION 32 INCREASES PRICES FOR 
CALIFORNIANS WHEN WE CAN LEAST AFFORD IT 
The cost of living in California is too high. Prices are 
up more than 20% in the last three years for food, gas, 
utilities, healthcare, and clothing. Proposition 32 makes 
it even worse as it will increase costs on family-owned 
businesses who can least afford it and force small 
employers to increase prices for consumers to absorb 
the higher minimum wage. Looking at the new California 
fast-food minimum wage law, fast-food prices in California 
have gone up 7% in six months, the fastest in the nation. 
Some well-known “value meals” now cost over 40% more 
in California than the rest of the country. 
Prop. 32 brings these record-setting price increases to 
small restaurants, grocery stores, convenience stores, small retail shops, farmers, and more, so we’re going to 
see the same sticker shock everywhere. 
PROPOSITION 32 WILL HURT SMALL, FAMILY-OWNED 
BUSINESSES 
Proposition 32 imposes the same high minimum wage 
on small businesses as it does for large corporations. 
Small businesses are more vulnerable to the impact 
of this higher cost and could force these family-owned 
businesses in our neighborhoods and communities to  
shut down. 
PROPOSITION 32 COSTS JOBS 
Raising the minimum wage again sounds like something 
that would help workers struggling to make ends meet. 
Who doesn’t want workers to get paid more? It makes us 
feel good if we think we’re helping our fellow Californians 
out. 
But the reality has now been confirmed, raising the 
minimum wage, especially when we raise it TOO FAST, 
costs thousands of jobs, and when a worker loses a job, 
or the company goes out of business, the wage is ZERO 
DOLLARS PER HOUR. And this job loss especially impacts 
our vulnerable populations the most, with young African-
American, Latino, and non-college educated workers 
trying to find their first jobs facing the biggest burdens. 
Get the facts at StopProp32.com, and vote NO ON 
PROPOSITION 32!
Jot Condie, President
California Restaurant Association
Jennifer Barrera, President
California Chamber of Commerce
Ron Fong, President
California Grocers AssociationRAISES MINIMUM WAGE. 
INITIATIVE STATUTE.PROPOSITION
32


42 | Title and Summary / AnalysisPROPOSITION EXPANDS LOCAL GOVERNMENTS’ AUTHORITY TO ENACT RENT 
CONTROL ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. INITIATIVE STATUTE.33
OFFICIAL TITLE AND SUMMARY PREPARED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
BACKGROUND
Rental Housing Is Expensive in California. 
Renters in California typically pay about 
50 percent more for housing than renters in 
other states. In some parts of the state, rent 
costs are more than double the national 
average. Rent is high in California because 
the state does not have enough housing for 
everyone who wants to live here. People 
who want to live here must compete with 
other renters for housing, which increases 
rents.
Several Cities Have Rent Control Laws. 
Some local governments in California have 
laws that limit how much landlords can 
increase rents from one year to the next. 
These laws often are called rent control. 
About one-quarter of Californians live 
in communities with local rent control. 
Examples of places with rent control are the 
Cities of Los Angeles, San Francisco, and 
San Jose.
State Law Limits Rent Increases. In addition 
to local rent control laws, a state law prevents most landlords from increasing a 
tenant’s rent by more than 5 percent plus 
inflation (up to a total of 10 percent) in a 
year. This law lasts until 2030. 
State Law Limits Local Rent Control. 
Another state law, known as the Costa-
Hawkins Rental Housing Act (Costa-
Hawkins), limits local rent control laws in 
three main ways. First, rent control cannot 
apply to any single-family homes. Second, 
rent control cannot apply to any housing 
built on or after February 1, 1995. Third, 
rent control laws generally cannot tell 
landlords what they can charge a new renter 
when first moving in. Instead, rent control 
can only limit how much landlords increase 
rent for existing renters.
PROPOSAL
Allows Local Governments to Expand Rent 
Control. Proposition 33 eliminates Costa-
Hawkins. Under the proposition, cities and 
counties can control rents for any housing. 
They also can limit how much a landlord • Current state law (the Costa-Hawkins 
Rental Housing Act of 1995) generally 
prevents cities and counties from limiting 
the initial rental rate that landlords may 
charge to new tenants in all types of 
housing, and from limiting rent increases 
for existing tenants in (1) residential 
properties that were first occupied after 
February 1, 1995; (2) single-family 
homes; and (3) condominiums.
• This measure would repeal that state 
law and would prohibit the state from limiting the ability of cities and counties 
to maintain, enact, or expand residential 
rent-control ordinances.
SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE ANALYST’S ESTIMATE 
OF NET STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT FISCAL 
IMPACT: 
• Reduction in local property tax revenues 
of at least tens of millions of dollars 
annually due to likely expansion of rent 
control in some communities. 
ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYSTThe text of this measure can be found on page 100 and the Secretary of State’s website at 
voterguide.sos.ca.gov.
33
For the full text of Proposition 33, see page 100.  Analysis | 43ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
may increase rents when a new renter 
moves in. The proposition itself does not 
make any changes to existing local rent 
control laws. Generally, cities and counties 
would have to take separate actions to 
change their local laws. 
Limits State Ability to Regulate Rent 
Control. Proposition 33 prevents the state 
from taking future actions to limit local rent 
control. 
FISCAL EFFECTS
Effects on Renters and Landlords. If 
Proposition 33 passes, local rent control 
laws probably would expand in some 
communities. This could have many effects 
on renters, landlords, and rental properties. 
The most likely effects are:
• Some renters who live in properties 
covered by rent control would spend 
less on rent. Some renters who live in 
properties not covered by rent control 
would spend more on rent. 
• Some renters would move less often. 
• Fewer homes would be available to 
rent. One reason for this is that some 
landlords would sell their properties 
to new owners who would live there 
instead of renting it out. 
• The value of rental housing would 
decline because potential landlords 
would not want to pay as much for 
these properties.
The size of these effects would depend on 
how many properties end up being covered by local rent control and how much rents 
are limited. These things would be decided 
by future actions of local governments and 
voters. 
Reduced Local Property Tax Revenues. 
A decline in the value of rental properties 
would reduce the amount of property 
taxes paid by landlords. This would reduce 
property tax revenues for cities, counties, 
special districts, and schools. With time, 
these property tax reductions likely would 
be at least tens of millions of dollars each 
year (annually). This is less than one-half of 
1 percent of all property tax revenue. About 
half of the reduction would be property tax 
revenues that would have gone to schools. 
In some years, the state might give more 
money to schools to cover their losses.
Increased Local Government Costs. If local 
rent control laws expand, local governments 
could have increased costs to carry out 
these laws. These costs could range from 
a few million dollars to tens of millions of 
dollars annually. These costs likely would be 
paid by fees on landlords.
Visit sos.ca.gov/campaign-lobbying/cal-access-
resources/measure-contributions/2024-
ballot-measure-contribution-totals for a list 
of committees primarily formed to support or 
oppose this measure.
Visit fppc.ca.gov/transparency/
top-contributors.html 
to access the committee’s top 10 contributors. EXPANDS LOCAL GOVERNMENTS’ AUTHORITY TO ENACT RENT 
CONTROL ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. INITIATIVE STATUTE.PROPOSITION
33
33
33
44 | Arguments Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency. PROPOSITION EXPANDS LOCAL GOVERNMENTS’ AUTHORITY TO ENACT RENT 
CONTROL ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. INITIATIVE STATUTE.33
★ ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 33  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 33  ★
They’re at it again. Proponents of Prop. 33 have taken 
millions of taxpayer dollars—money that is supposed to be 
used to help low-income HIV and AIDS patients—and spent 
it on yet another of their anti-housing crusades. 
Once again, they are pushing a measure that will hurt small 
mom and pop landlords. 
AHF, which has received billions of taxpayer dollars meant 
to serve patients, has diverted that money to pay for things 
that have nothing to do with healthcare—building their 
own real estate empire, while housing people in slum-like 
conditions in buildings they refuse to fix, and being fined 
repeatedly for their misuse of funds. 
Just like this measure, AHF is not what it appears to be. But 
don’t take our word for it. Read the stories that show AHF’s 
true colors: 
One of the state’s largest slumlords https://www.latimes.
com/homeless-housing/story/2023-11-16/aids-healthcare-
foundation-low-income-housing-landlords 
Even allowing a blind tenant to fall down an open elevator 
shaft https://www.latimes.com/homeless-housing/
story/2023-01-20/ahf-madison-hotel-elevator- lawsuit-story 
While they claim to fight for tenants, they are throwing low-
income tenants out on the street, while suing dozens of poor 
people in small-claims court: https://www.poz.com/article/
aids-healthcare-foundation-reportedly-houses-tenants-
squalid-conditions Meanwhile, they are wasting taxpayer dollars on lawsuits 
to block new housing https://www.sfchronicle.com/
politics/article/Lawsuit-seeks-to-block-Scott-Wiener-s-
rezoning-16480766.php and spending millions on political 
campaigns to push its no-growth agenda: https://www.
latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-aids-foundation-political-
spending-20170221-story.html 
The state even terminated its multi-million dollar contracts 
with AHF, citing “improper negotiation tactics” https://www.
latimes.com/california/story/2022-06-30/california-aids-
healthcare-foundation-state-contract 
And audits by LA County found AHF overcharged 
taxpayers by millions https://archive.kpcc.org/blogs/
politics/2013/07/18/14304/aids-healthcare-foundation-
asks-judge-to-delay-la/ 
Don’t be misled by AHF’s latest scheme to fool California 
voters. Vote No on Prop. 33. 
Michael Hedges, President
California Small Business Association 
Julian Canete, President
California Hispanic Chambers of Commerce 
Rev. Dwight Williams, Chair
California Senior AllianceWhere will I live?—This is the question that haunts 
California’s 17 million renters. 55% of Californians are 
rent burdened, paying more than 30% of their income 
on rent and there is no end in sight. Rent increases are 
far outstripping pay increases. A starting teacher, cop, or 
fire fighter is paying half their salary to afford the average 
apartment in California’s cities. Many who live on a fixed 
income are one rent increase away from homelessness—
and seniors represent the fastest growing homeless 
population. Something has to give. The affordable housing 
crisis is destroying the California Dream. 
California, the Golden State, was once the land of 
opportunity. However, things have changed dramatically. 
Nearly one million people have left California in the last 
five years. If this mass exodus continues, it will have 
catastrophic consequences for our state. California faces 
a $68 billion deficit which will only get worse as young 
talented people leave and the needy remain. 
We love California. It is a land of natural beauty. We are 
at the cutting edge of technological innovation with vast 
amounts of wealth. Yet, based on the cost of living, we are 
the poorest state in America. We have way too many seniors, 
single parents, low-wage workers, and veterans choosing 
between paying rent and putting food on the table. 
The housing crisis is complex. There isn’t one magic bullet 
to solve it, but the place we have to start is keeping people 
in their homes. The only practical way to do it is to allow local 
government to enact and expand rent control because one 
size doesn’t fit all. What’s practical for Los Angeles doesn’t 
work in Los Gatos. 
We need to build more affordable housing and preserve the 
affordable units we have. But while we are waiting, we need to protect tenants and keep them housed—when you’re in a 
hole, stop digging. 
Rent control is an American tradition since 1919 and works 
well in many cities. It was largely shut down in 1995 when 
the landlord lobby convinced Sacramento to drastically 
curtail it. Ever since, corporate landlords have made sure 
that the Legislature doesn’t modify the law no matter how 
bad things get. 
We understand that mom and pop landlords have invested 
their life savings into their buildings and can identify with 
the plight of their tenants. The CA Constitution guarantees 
them a reasonable rate of return. But it is the billionaire 
corporate landlords who are calling the shots and causing 
skyrocketing rents. 
Even if you are not a renter, your quality of life and the value 
of your property are still harmed by the housing crisis. 
Proposition 33 will return fairness to the equation. Visit 
www.yeson33.org 
Supporters: California Democratic Party, Veterans’ Voices, 
California Nurses Association, CA Alliance for Retired 
Americans, Housing Is a Human Right, American Federation 
of Teachers 1521, 2121, Tenants Together, Consumer 
Watchdog, Coalition for Economic Survival, Social Security 
Works, Mental Health Advocacy, Housing NOW, ACCE, 
UNITE HERE Local 11 
Basil Kimbrew, Executive Director
Veterans’ Voices
Pauline Brooks, Board President
California Alliance for Retired Americans 
William Arroyo, Board President
AIDS Healthcare Foundation / Housing Is a Human Right
33
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.  Arguments | 45EXPANDS LOCAL GOVERNMENTS’ AUTHORITY TO ENACT RENT 
CONTROL ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. INITIATIVE STATUTE.PROPOSITION
33
★ ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 33  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 33  ★
Who do you believe? The billionaire landlords behind the 
California Apartment Association which has spent hundreds 
of millions of dollars opposing renter protections? Or do you 
believe the AIDS Healthcare Foundation—the largest AIDS 
organization in the world—Veterans’ Voices, the Coalition 
for Economic Survival, 100 local elected officials, and the 
cities of San Francisco, Santa Monica, and West Hollywood?
The billionaire landlords will fill the airwaves and your 
mailbox with lies and deceptions paid for by extorting 
exorbitant rents from people on social security or disability. 
Our proposition is just 23 words. It allows cities to regulate 
rents the way they did until 1995 when Sacramento, at the 
demand of these same billionaires, took that right away—
nothing more. Every city will decide for themselves whether 
or not they need rent control. 
Academics and non-profits for hire will say anything the 
billionaire landlords want them to for a price. Believe your own eyes. We are facing a $68 billion deficit 
made worse by the one million people who have left 
California. More than half of California’s 17 million renters 
are paying more than 30% of their income on rent. 
The billionaire landlords are using fear to get homeowners 
and renters to vote against your own interests. Homeowners 
will only benefit from healthy communities. Renters are 
desperate to remain in their homes. 
Rent control is an American tradition since 1919. New 
York and many other cities with rent control have only seen 
property values soar. 
Vote Yes—the rent is too damn high. 
Sandy Reding, President
California Nurses Association 
Pauline Brooks, Board President
California Alliance for Retired Americans 
Larry Gross, Executive Director
Coalition for Economic SurvivalPROP. 33 IS A DEEPLY FLAWED SCHEME THAT WILL 
INCREASE HOUSING COSTS AND BLOCK AFFORDABLE 
HOUSING 
If Prop. 33 seems familiar, it’s because nearly 60% of 
California voters rejected the same flawed scheme in 2018 
and 2020. Seniors, veterans, and affordable housing experts 
all oppose Prop. 33 because it will make the housing crisis 
dramatically worse. The Housing Action Coalition calls 
Prop. 33 “deeply flawed and deceptively anti-housing. ” 
Here's why you should vote NO on Prop. 33: 
FUNDED BY NOTORIOUS SLUMLORD 
Prop. 33 was written and bankrolled by Corporate CEO 
Michael Weinstein of AHF. The Los Angeles Times describes 
Weinstein as a “slumlord” with a long record of health 
and safety violations and unfair evictions. State housing 
regulators cited his residents living in “squalid conditions, 
exposed to roach and bedbug infestations. ” 
NOT WHAT IT SEEMS. PROP. 33 IS A TROJAN HORSE THAT 
OVERTURNS STATE AFFORDABLE HOUSING LAWS 
Prop. 33 is misleading. The measure could effectively 
overturn more than 100 state housing laws, including laws 
making it easier to build affordable housing, and fair housing 
and tenant eviction protections. It could also strip the 
Attorney General’s ability to enforce certain current housing 
laws. It’s why one of the state’s most notorious corporate 
“slumlords” is bankrolling Prop. 33.
WORSENS HOUSING CRISIS 
Economists and housing experts at Stanford and UC 
Berkeley say Prop. 33 will make California’s housing crisis 
significantly worse by reducing the construction of new 
affordable housing. Prop. 33 will make it harder to become 
a homeowner or find a place to rent, driving up costs for 
renters and home buyers. 
ELIMINATES HOMEOWNER PROTECTIONS 
Prop. 33 takes away basic protections for homeowners and 
allows bureaucrats, politicians, and regulators to tell single-
family homeowners how much they can charge to rent out a single room. Millions of homeowners will be treated just 
like corporate landlords and subject to regulations and price 
controls enacted by unelected boards. 
WEAKENS RENTER PROTECTIONS 
Prop. 33 undermines the strongest statewide rent control 
law in the nation signed by Governor Newsom and has no 
protections for renters. 
REDUCES HOME VALUES UP TO 25% 
Non-partisan researchers at MIT estimate extreme rent 
control measures like this result in an average reduction in 
home values up to 25%. Californians can’t afford to take 
another hit with the economic collapse threatening their 
home values and life savings.
OFFERS NO PROTECTIONS FOR SENIORS, VETERANS, OR 
THE DISABLED 
Prop. 33 has no protections for seniors, veterans, or the 
disabled. Veterans, seniors, and social justice organizations 
agree it’s the last thing we need right now. 
OPPOSED BY A BROAD BIPARTISAN COALITION 
Democrats and Republicans agree Prop. 33 will make 
the housing crisis worse. Opponents include: California 
Small Business Association • California Senior Alliance 
• California Conference of Carpenters • California YIMBY 
• California Chamber of Commerce • Senate President Pro 
Tem Emeritus Toni Atkins • Democratic Assemblymember 
Buffy Wicks • Marine Corps Veterans Association
DEMAND REAL HOUSING SOLUTIONS 
We should Vote “NO” on Prop. 33 and demand real 
solutions. 
VOTE NO ON PROPOSITION 33. Learn more at 
NoOnProp33.com 
Ken Rosen, Economics Professor Emeritus
UC Berkeley 
Jenna Abbott, Executive Director
California Council for Affordable Housing 
Kendra Moss, Advisory Member
Women Veterans Alliance


46 | Title and Summary / AnalysisPROPOSITION RESTRICTS SPENDING OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG REVENUES BY 
CERTAIN HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.34
OFFICIAL TITLE AND SUMMARY PREPARED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
BACKGROUND
DRUG COVERAGE IN MEDI-CAL
Medi-Cal Pays for Prescription Drugs 
for Low-Income People. Medi-Cal is a 
federal-state program that provides health 
coverage for low-income people. This 
coverage includes the cost of prescription 
drugs.
Medi-Cal Has a New Approach to Pay 
for Drugs. Before 2019, Medi-Cal paid 
for the cost of prescription drugs in 
different ways. In 2019, the state adopted 
a single approach called “Medi-Cal Rx. ” 
Medi-Cal Rx likely saves the state money 
because Medi-Cal pays for drugs at more 
discounted prices. 
New Approach Is Not in State Law. Medi-
Cal Rx is not reflected in state law, but it is the approach used to pay for drugs in 
Medi-Cal. 
FEDERAL DRUG DISCOUNT PROGRAM
Federal Program Provides Discounts on 
Drugs to Certain Health Care Providers. 
Under a federal program, drug makers 
provide discounts on their drugs to 
hospitals, clinics, and other providers. 
To qualify for these discounts, providers 
must meet certain rules. Eligible providers 
are public or private nonprofits that focus 
on serving low-income people. (These 
public and private nonprofits generally 
are exempt from paying taxes on their 
revenue.)
Providers Tend to Earn Revenue From 
Federal Discounts. Providers tend to 
earn net revenue from the federal drug 
discount program. They do so by charging • Requires health care providers 
meeting specified criteria to spend 
98% of revenues from federal discount 
prescription drug program on direct 
patient care. 
• Applies only to health care providers 
that: (1) spent over $100,000,000 
in any ten-year period on anything 
other than direct patient care; and (2) 
operated multifamily housing reported 
to have at least 500 high-severity health 
and safety violations. 
• Penalizes noncompliance with spending 
restrictions by revoking health care 
licenses and tax-exempt status.• Permanently authorizes state to 
negotiate Medi-Cal drug prices on 
statewide basis. 
SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE ANALYST’S 
ESTIMATE OF NET STATE AND LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT FISCAL IMPACT: 
• Increased state costs, likely in the 
millions of dollars annually, to enforce 
new rules on certain health care entities. 
Affected entities would pay fees to cover 
these costs. 
ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYSTThe text of this measure can be found on page 103 and the Secretary of State’s website at 
voterguide.sos.ca.gov.
34
For the full text of Proposition 34, see page 103.  Analysis | 47ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
payors of health care (such as private 
health plans and government programs) 
more than the cost to provide the drugs. 
However, providers generally do not earn 
net revenue on these drugs in Medi-Cal. 
This is because state law bans providers 
from charging Medi-Cal more than the 
discounted price of the drug.
Providers Decide How to Spend Revenue. 
According to the federal government, 
the intent of the federal drug discount 
program is to allow eligible providers to 
increase services and serve more low-
income patients. Providers can do so by 
spending their net revenue on services to 
patients. Federal and state law, however, 
does not directly restrict how providers 
spend their revenue from federal drug 
discounts.
STATE LICENSING
Health Care Entities Must Be Licensed. 
Health care entities must be licensed 
to provide services in the state. Several 
departments license health care entities, 
such as the Department of Managed Health Care (for most health plans) and 
the Department of Public Health (for 
hospitals, clinics, and certain other kinds 
of facilities).
Licensed Entities Must Follow Certain 
Rules. Licensed entities must follow 
certain rules. For example, they cannot 
engage in conduct that is unprofessional, 
dishonest, or harmful to public health or 
safety. An entity that violates these rules 
can face penalties, including losing its 
license (which means the entity can no 
longer operate as a health care entity).
PROPOSAL
Restricts How Certain Entities Spend 
Revenue From Federal Discounts. 
Proposition 34 creates new rules about 
how certain health care entities spend 
revenue from the federal drug discount 
program. Specifically, the entities would 
have to spend at least 98 percent of their 
net revenue earned in California on health 
care services provided directly to patients 
(“direct patient care”). As Figure 1 shows, RESTRICTS SPENDING OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG REVENUES BY 
CERTAIN HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.PROPOSITION
34
34
48 | AnalysisANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
these rules apply only to entities that meet 
certain conditions (“affected entities”).
Requires Affected Entities to Report 
Annually to the State. Proposition 34 
requires affected entities to report 
certain information to the state each 
year (annually). The affected entities 
would have to report how much revenue 
they earned in California and nationwide 
from the federal drug discount program 
and how they spent this revenue. The 
state would use this information to help 
determine compliance with the new 
rules. The proposition allows the state to 
charge fees on affected entities to cover 
its enforcement costs. Under Proposition 
34, affected entities that do not submit 
timely and accurate information 
would be engaging in conduct that is 
unprofessional, dishonest, or harmful to 
public health or safety.
Establishes Penalties for Violating 
Rules. As Figure 2 shows, Proposition 34 
establishes four penalties for violating 
the new rules. All four penalties would 
apply if affected entities spend less 
than 98 percent of their net federal discount revenue on direct patient care. 
The penalties also would apply if the 
affected entities engage in conduct that is 
unprofessional, dishonest, or harmful to 
public health or safety.
Adds Medi-Cal’s Approach to Pay for 
Drugs to State Law. Proposition 34 adds 
Medi-Cal Rx to state law. Because Medi-
Cal Rx already is in effect, the proposition 
does not change the current approach 
Medi-Cal uses to pay for drugs.
FISCAL EFFECTS
Has Limited Statewide Fiscal Effects. 
Under Proposition 34, likely few entities 
would meet the conditions described in 
Figure 1. The exact number of affected 
entities, however, is not known. Because 
few entities would be affected, the 
proposition’s statewide fiscal effect 
(described below) would be limited.
Increases State Enforcement Costs, 
Paid by New Fees. Proposition 34 would 
increase state costs to enforce the new 
restrictions. These costs likely would be in 
the millions of dollars annually. The state PROPOSITION RESTRICTS SPENDING OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG REVENUES BY 
CERTAIN HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.34
34

For the full text of Proposition 34, see page 103  Analysis | 49ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
would cover this cost by charging fees on 
affected entities.
Could Have Other Fiscal Effects. 
Proposition 34 could have other uncertain 
fiscal effects, such as:
• Savings From Increased Spending on 
Direct Patient Care. Some affected 
entities could increase spending 
on direct patient care to comply 
with Proposition 34. If this increase 
results in more spending on Medi-Cal 
patients, there could be savings to 
the state. This would depend on what 
health care services are provided. 
• Costs From Fewer Federal Drug 
Discounts. Affected entities would 
have to pay fees and report to the 
state annually. Some entities might 
change their operations to avoid these 
requirements. For example, they 
could stop participating in the federal 
discount program. To the extent this 
results in fewer federal discounts to 
the Medi-Cal program, there would be 
state costs.• Fiscal Effects From Violating Rules. 
Were an affected entity to violate 
Proposition 34’s restrictions or 
engage in bad conduct, it would 
face penalties (such as the loss 
of its tax-exempt status and its 
health care licenses for ten years). 
These penalties could put it out of 
business. This could affect state tax 
revenue, state spending on Medi-
Cal, or spending on other state and 
local government programs. The 
fiscal effect would depend on which 
affected entities face penalties.
Visit sos.ca.gov/campaign-lobbying/cal-access-
resources/measure-contributions/2024-
ballot-measure-contribution-totals for a list 
of committees primarily formed to support or 
oppose this measure.
Visit fppc.ca.gov/transparency/
top-contributors.html 
to access the committee’s top 10 contributors. 34RESTRICTS SPENDING OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG REVENUES BY 
CERTAIN HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.PROPOSITION
34
34
50 | Arguments Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency. PROPOSITION RESTRICTS SPENDING OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG REVENUES BY 
CERTAIN HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.34
★ ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 34  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 34  ★
Vote No on 34—The Revenge Initiative. The California 
Apartment Association, representing the billionaire 
landlords, is lying through its teeth. Prop. 34 has one and 
only one purpose: to prevent AIDS Healthcare Foundation 
(AHF) from supporting rent control. 
Do you believe that these billionaire landlords are 
suddenly so concerned about access to healthcare for 
poor Californians? And it is a lie that it will lower drug costs 
since Medi-Cal has already implemented a low-cost drug 
program. 
AHF is the sponsor of Prop. 33—the rent control initiative. 
Landlords are spending tens of millions to protect their 
obscene corporate profits while more than 50% of 
California’s 17 million renters are paying more than 30% 
of their income on rent. 
You might notice that they don’t even mention AHF by 
name because they don’t want you to know that they want 
to harm the largest AIDS organization in the world. 
They are lying when they call the federal 340B drug 
discount program government money. 100% of the funds derived from 340B come from discounts that come right 
out of the pockets of drug companies. Don’t be fooled—
big pharma has contributed to many of the supporting 
organizations for Prop. 34. A strong 340B program is good 
for California, bad for big pharma. 
As they themselves admit, non-profits are permitted 
by federal law to use these drug company discounts in 
accordance with their non-profit mission—advocating for 
rent control, women’s reproductive rights, and a healthy 
environment. 
Vote No on The Revenge Initiative. 
Jerilyn Stapleton, Board Member
National Organization for Women 
Jamie Court, President
Consumer Watchdog 
Larry Gross, Executive Director
Coalition for Economic SurvivalRising healthcare costs are squeezing millions of 
Californians. Prop. 34 will give California patients and 
taxpayers much needed relief, and lowers state drug 
costs, while saving California taxpayers billions. 
CUT PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRICES 
Prop. 34 will drastically cut the cost of prescription drugs 
for Medi-Cal patients by permanently authorizing the 
State of California to negotiate lower Medi-Cal prescription 
drug costs. 
PROTECT PATIENTS AND TAXPAYERS 
Prop. 34 stands to save taxpayers millions of dollars 
more every year by requiring the greediest healthcare 
corporations to spend at least 98% of the taxpayer 
funds they receive through the drug discount program in 
California on directly treating patients. 
STOP HEALTHCARE CORPORATION FINANCIAL ABUSE 
IN CALIFORNIA 
Prop. 34 stops egregious financial abuse of the taxpayer-
funded drug discount program in California. 
Over 30 years ago, the federal government began offering 
discounted prescription drugs and other treatments to 
uninsured and low-income patients. However, healthcare 
corporations across the country have used a legal 
loophole to game the system and divert money from the 
drug discount program to pet projects that have done 
nothing to benefit patients: wasting money on renting out 
football stadiums to put on private concerts, giving their 
executives multimillion dollar salaries, paying for naming 
rights on sports stadiums, spending millions on lobbying, 
and dumping millions more into political campaigns. 
Worse yet, these same corporations that get billions 
in taxpayer dollars have spent hundreds of millions of 
dollars on housing projects that are often run like slums. 
An LA Times investigation found that residents at several of these housing projects were forced to live in squalid 
conditions, exposed to roach and bedbug infestations, 
putting the health and safety of tenants at risk. 
Prop. 34 will prevent this abuse from occurring in 
California and requires drug discount program dollars 
generated in California to be used for their intended 
purpose: helping patients. 
HOLD ABUSERS ACCOUNTABLE 
Prop. 34 holds violators accountable. Healthcare 
organizations that break the rules and misuse these 
taxpayer dollars must either recommit to spending on 
direct patient care or risk losing their California tax-
exempt status and professional licenses. 
Prop. 34 is targeted at those bad actors who have 
continually abused the system to pocket billions of 
taxpayer dollars for their own use. That’s why it is 
supported by a wide coalition, including organizations 
that advocate to help patients and leaders in the LGBTQ 
community. Those supporting Prop. 34 include the 
California Chronic Care Coalition, the ALS Association, the 
Defeating Epilepsy Foundation, California Senior Alliance, 
AiArthritis, Support Fibromyalgia Network, Lupus and 
Allied Diseases Association, Inc., and the Community 
Access National Network. 
It’s time to close the corporate loophole that allows 
wealthy pharmacy corporations to divert money meant to 
help patients. Protect Patients Now. Vote Yes on Prop. 34. 
Learn more at YesOnProp34.com. 
Assemblymember Evan Low, Former Chair
Legislative LGBT Caucus 
Kelly Goss, Managing Director
The ALS Association 
Nilza Serrano, Founder
Latino Heritage Los Angeles
34
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.  Arguments | 51RESTRICTS SPENDING OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG REVENUES BY 
CERTAIN HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.PROPOSITION
34
★ ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 34  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 34  ★
When we have bad corporate actors that profit off public 
programs, the services our families rely upon take the 
hit, including schools, public safety, and emergency 
responders. The current system is being abused by 
corporations that are wasting billions of dollars intended 
for patient care every year and making our communities 
less safe, endangering the public’s health and safety. 
Instead of helping patients, those funds are being used to: 
Finance slums that are unsafe and violate health codes:
https://www.latimes.com/homeless-housing/
story/2023-11-16/aids-healthcare -foundation-low-income-
housing-landlords 
Sue low-income tenants and throw them out on the street: 
https://www.poz.com/article/aids-healthcare-foundation-
reportedly-houses -tenants-squalid-conditions 
Buy stadium naming rights:
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/09/24/health/bon -
secours-mercy-health-profit-poor-neighborhood.html And pay corporate CEOs millions:
https://lowninstitute.org/projects/2023-shkreli-awards/ 
Prop. 34 would stop the worst corporate abuses of 
the federal low-cost prescription drug program and 
ensure that money meant for patients is not wasted on 
corporations’ pet projects, political crusades, or misused 
in ways that risk the public’s health and safety. Prop. 34 
will ensure corporations that are misusing public funds 
are held accountable. It’s time to stop the rip-off. We 
must make sure that money meant for patients is spent 
on taking care of those who need help, not risking public 
safety. Vote Yes on 34. 
Brian K. Rice, President
California Professional Firefighters 
Stuart Fong, Chair
San Francisco Hep B Free 
Rev. Dwight Williams, Chair
California Senior AllianceProposition 34 is sponsored by the billionaire landlords 
who control the California Apartment Association (CAA). 
This initiative is a wolf in sheep’s clothing. It has only one 
purpose: to prevent AIDS Healthcare Foundation (AHF) 
from promoting rent control. It claims to protect patients, 
but its real intent is to stop AHF from putting tenant 
protections on the ballot. 
On this same ballot is Proposition 33, the rent control 
initiative which is simply 23 words: 
“The state may not limit the right of any city, county, or 
city and county to maintain, enact or expand residential 
rent control. ” AHF is the principal funder of this rent 
control initiative. Proposition 33 restores the ability 
of localities to stabilize rents and give some relief to 
California’s 17 million struggling renters. 
CAA and the billionaire supporters who have been 
gouging renters want to stop rent control at all costs. 
Can anyone believe that these corporate landlords are 
suddenly interested in healthcare? And guess who’s 
behind the endless ads you will see for Prop. 34—the big 
drug companies through their bought and paid for front 
groups. These two rogue industries are united in wanting 
to destroy AHF, which is the most powerful voice for lower 
rents and lower drug prices. 
AHF is the largest AIDS organization in the world with 
2 million lives in care in 47 countries across the globe. 
Our mission is: Cutting Edge Medicine and Advocacy 
Regardless of Ability to Pay. AHF was born out of outrage that AIDS patients were often 
dying in the hallways of the county hospital. AIDS patients 
needed a home to die in. Fortunately, HIV treatment 
has drastically improved so that today housing is the #1 
problem facing our patients. 
Proposition 34 is a grave danger to democracy. It seeks 
to weaponize the initiative process by allowing powerful 
interests to target a single organization to punish and 
shut them up. If passed, this proposition would threaten 
the ability of organizations to advocate for reproductive 
rights, renter needs, and environmental protections. The 
Los Angeles Times even described it as a “self-serving” 
ballot initiative that reached a “new low. ” 
If this becomes the law, where will it stop? For this reason, 
it is opposed by The National Organization for Women, 
Consumer Watchdog, The Coalition for Economic Survival, 
UNITE HERE Local 11, Dolores Huerta, and many others. 
We trust that you, the voters, will see through this 
corporate landlord scam and vote NO on Proposition 34. 
Visit www.votenoon34.org for more information. 
Jerilyn Stapleton, Board Member
National Organization for Women 
Larry Gross, Executive Director
Coalition for Economic Survival 
Condessa M. Curley, M.D. /MPH, Board Member
AIDS Healthcare Foundation 


52 | Title and Summary / AnalysisPROPOSITION PROVIDES PERMANENT FUNDING FOR MEDI-CAL 
HEALTH CARE SERVICES. INITIATIVE STATUTE.35
OFFICIAL TITLE AND SUMMARY PREPARED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
BACKGROUND
State Charges a Specific Tax on 
Health Plans. Since 2009, California 
typically has charged a specific tax on 
certain health plans, such as Kaiser 
Permanente. This tax is called the 
Managed Care Organization Provider 
Tax (“health plan tax”). The tax has 
worked differently over time. Currently, 
it charges plans based on the number 
of people to whom they provide health 
coverage, including those in Medi-Cal. 
The tax rate is higher for those in Medi-Cal compared to other kinds of health 
coverage. (Medi-Cal is a federal-state 
program that provides health coverage 
for low-income people. The federal 
government and the state share the 
cost of the program. By charging the 
health plan tax, the state can receive 
more federal funding.)
State Uses Tax for Two Purposes. 
The amount of revenue raised by the 
health plan tax has changed over time. 
Based on recent legislative action, we 
estimate the tax is expected to result • Makes permanent the existing tax on 
managed health care insurance plans 
(currently set to expire in 2026), 
which, if approved by the federal 
government, provides revenues 
to pay for health care services for 
low-income families with children, 
seniors, disabled persons, and other 
Medi-Cal recipients. 
• Requires revenues to be used only 
for specified Medi-Cal services, 
including primary and specialty care, 
emergency care, family planning, 
mental health, and prescription 
drugs. 
• Prohibits revenues from being used 
to replace existing Medi-Cal funding. 
• Caps administrative expenses and 
requires independent audits of 
programs receiving funding.SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE ANALYST’S 
ESTIMATE OF NET STATE AND LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT FISCAL IMPACT: 
• In the short term, increased funding 
for Medi-Cal and other health 
programs between roughly $2 billion 
and $5 billion annually (including 
federal funds). Increased state 
costs between roughly $1 billion 
to $2 billion annually to implement 
funding increases.
• In the long term, unknown effect on 
state tax revenue, health program 
funding, and state costs. Fiscal 
effects depend on many factors, such 
as whether the Legislature would 
continue to approve the tax on health 
plans in the future if Proposition 35 is 
not passed by voters. 
ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYSTThe text of this measure can be found on page 109 and the Secretary of State’s website at 
voterguide.sos.ca.gov.
35
For the full text of Proposition 35, see page 109.  Analysis | 53ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
in between $7 billion to $8 billion each 
year (annually) to the state. The state 
uses this money for two purposes.
• Paying for Existing Costs in Medi-
Cal. Some revenue helps pay for 
existing costs in the Medi-Cal 
program. Using the tax revenue in 
this way allows the state to spend 
less money from the General Fund 
on Medi-Cal. (The General Fund 
is the account the state uses 
to pay for most public services, 
including education, health care, 
and prisons. Medi-Cal is expected 
to get around $35 billion from the 
General Fund this year.) In other 
words, the health plan tax revenue 
reduces costs to the state General 
Fund.
• Increasing Funding for Medi-Cal 
and Other Health Programs. Some 
of the revenue increases funding 
for Medi-Cal and other health 
programs. For example, the state 
is increasing Medi-Cal payments 
to doctors and other health care 
providers. This is a new use of 
health plan tax revenue. Some of 
these funding increases began in 
2024, but most will begin in 2025 
and 2026. Once they all begin in 
2026, the increases likely would 
result in around $4 billion more 
for Medi-Cal annually. Around half 
of this amount will come from the 
health plan tax. (The rest will come 
from increased federal funding.)Tax Will End, Unless It Is Approved 
Again. The Legislature has not 
permanently approved this tax. 
Instead, it has approved it for a few 
years at a time. The federal government 
also must approve the tax. The tax was 
most recently approved in 2023. It will 
expire at the end of 2026, unless the 
Legislature and federal government 
approve it again.
PROPOSAL
Makes Existing Health Plan Tax 
Permanent. Proposition 35 makes the 
existing health plan tax permanent 
beginning in 2027. The state would 
still need federal approval to charge 
the tax. The tax would continue to 
be based on the number of people 
to whom health plans provide health 
coverage. The proposition allows the 
state to change the tax, if needed, to 
get federal approval, within certain 
limits.
Creates Rules on How State Uses 
Tax Revenue. In addition to making 
the health plan tax permanent, 
Proposition 35 creates rules on how 
to use the revenue. Generally, these 
rules require the state to use more of 
the revenue to increase funding for 
Medi-Cal and other health programs. 
The rules are different in the short term 
(in 2025 and 2026) and the long term 
(in 2027 and after). Proposition 35 
also changes which Medi-Cal services 
and other health programs get funding 
increases compared to current law. PROVIDES PERMANENT FUNDING FOR MEDI-CAL 
HEALTH CARE SERVICES. INITIATIVE STATUTE. PROPOSITION
35
35
54 | AnalysisANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
Figure 1 shows these changes in the 
short term.
FISCAL EFFECT
In Short Term, Three Key Fiscal 
Effects. In the short term (in 2025 and 
2026), Proposition 35 would have the 
following key fiscal effects:
• No Change to State Tax Revenue. 
Proposition 35 does not change 
the existing temporary tax on health plans, which expires at the 
end of 2026. For this reason, the 
proposition would have no effect on 
state tax revenue over this period 
of time.
• Increased Funding for Health 
Programs. Proposition 35 would 
increase funding for Medi-Cal and 
other health programs. This is 
because the proposition requires 
the state to use more health plan PROPOSITION PROVIDES PERMANENT FUNDING FOR MEDI-CAL 
HEALTH CARE SERVICES. INITIATIVE STATUTE. 35
35

For the full text of Proposition 35, see page 109.  Analysis | 55ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
tax revenue for funding increases. 
The total increase in funding 
likely would be between roughly 
$2 billion and $5 billion annually. 
About half of this amount would 
come from the tax on health plans. 
(Because the federal government 
shares the cost of Medi-Cal with 
the state, the rest of the funding 
increase would come from federal 
funds. Including all fund sources, 
Medi-Cal is expected to get over 
$150 billion this year.)
• Increased State Costs. Proposition 
35 would increase state costs. 
This is because it reduces the 
amount of health plan tax revenue 
that can be used to help pay for 
existing costs in Medi-Cal. Instead, 
the state likely would have to use 
more money from the General 
Fund for this purpose. The annual 
cost would be between roughly 
$1 billion to $2 billion in 2025 and 
2026. These amounts are between 
one-half of 1 percent and 1 percent 
of the state’s total General Fund 
budget.
In Long Term, Unknown Fiscal Effects. 
In the long term (2027 and after), 
Proposition 35 makes the temporary 
tax on health plans permanent and 
creates new rules about how to spend 
the money. The fiscal effect of these 
changes depends on many factors. For example, the state could approve 
the tax in the future, as it has done 
in the past, even if the proposition 
is not passed by voters. Also, it is 
uncertain how large of a tax the federal 
government would approve in the 
future. Given these uncertain factors, 
the proposition’s long-term effects on 
tax revenue, health program funding, 
and state costs are unknown.
Temporarily Increases State Spending 
Limit. The California Constitution has 
various rules that impact the state 
budget. One rule limits how much 
state tax revenue can be spent on 
any purpose annually. Voters may 
increase this limit for up to four years 
at a time. In line with these rules, 
Proposition 35 temporarily increases 
the limit by the size of the health plan 
tax for four years. After the temporary 
increase ends, the long-term effect of 
the proposition on the state’s spending 
limit is uncertain. This is because it is 
unknown how Proposition 35 would 
affect state tax revenue in the future.
Visit sos.ca.gov/campaign-lobbying/cal-access-
resources/measure-contributions/2024-
ballot-measure-contribution-totals for a list 
of committees primarily formed to support or 
oppose this measure.
Visit fppc.ca.gov/transparency/
top-contributors.html 
to access the committee’s top 10 contributors. 35PROVIDES PERMANENT FUNDING FOR MEDI-CAL 
HEALTH CARE SERVICES. INITIATIVE STATUTE. PROPOSITION
35
35
56 | Arguments Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency. PROPOSITION PROVIDES PERMANENT FUNDING FOR MEDI-CAL 
HEALTH CARE SERVICES. INITIATIVE STATUTE. 35
★ ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 35  ★
CALIFORNIA’S HEALTHCARE SYSTEM IS IN CRISIS 
Hospitals and health clinics are closing in rural and urban 
communities across California. Emergency rooms are 
overcrowded. More than 40 California hospitals have 
stopped offering labor and delivery services. Patients 
wait months to see a doctor for important preventative 
care, and often cannot get an appointment for specialty 
care when needed. The healthcare crisis is made worse 
because the state has redirected more than $30 billion 
in healthcare funding over the last 15 years to other 
purposes. 
THE CRISIS IS WORST FOR CALIFORNIA’S CHILDREN & 
MOST VULNERABLE POPULATIONS 
More than 15 million Californians rely on Medi-Cal for 
health insurance coverage, including more than 50% of 
all children in the state and low-income families, seniors, 
and persons with disabilities. But lack of adequate and 
ongoing funding means Medi-Cal patients must wait 
months to see primary care doctors or cardiologists, 
cancer doctors, pediatric specialists, or orthopedists. 
YES ON PROP. 35 PROVIDES DEDICATED FUNDING TO 
IMPROVE THE HEALTHCARE SYSTEM FOR ALL OF US—
WITHOUT RAISING TAXES 
Prop. 35 will address our most urgent healthcare priorities 
by securing dedicated, ongoing funding—without raising 
taxes on individuals—to protect and expand access 
to care at primary care and specialty care physicians, 
community health clinics, hospitals, emergency rooms, 
family planning and mental health providers. Prop. 35 
extends an existing levy on health insurance companies 
that will otherwise expire in 2026. And Prop. 35 prevents 
the state from redirecting these funds for non-healthcare 
purposes. 
YES ON 35 PROTECTS AND EXPANDS ACCESS TO 
HEALTHCARE FOR ALL PATIENTS
Prop. 35 dedicates funding for: 
• Expanding access to preventative healthcare so patients 
don’t have to rely on crowded ERs or urgent care clinics 
as their primary source of care 
• Reducing wait times in emergency rooms 
• Hiring more first responders and paramedics to reduce 
emergency response times 
• Primary care and physicians’ offices 
• Community health centers 
• OBGYNs and specialty care like cancer and cardiology 
care • Family planning 
• Expanded mental health treatment 
• Healthcare workforce training to address the worker 
shortage 
• Services for Medi-Cal patients to expand access to 
hospitals, physicians, women’s health centers, and 
community clinics. 
YES ON 35’s STRONG ACCOUNTABILITY 
REQUIREMENTS ENSURE MONEY IS SPENT ON PATIENT 
CARE 
Prop. 35 prevents the state from redirecting these funds 
for non-healthcare purposes and requires that 99% of the 
revenues must go to patient care. It caps administrative 
expenses at 1%. Lastly, the measure requires annual 
independent performance audits to ensure funds are 
spent effectively and as intended. 
PROP. 35 IS SUPPORTED BY FIRST RESPONDERS, 
HEALTHCARE WORKERS, PHYSICIANS, NURSES, AND A 
BIPARTISAN COALITION 
Prop. 35 is supported by: 
• International Association of EMTs and Paramedics 
• Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California 
• California Medical Association 
• American Academy of Pediatrics, California 
• American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists—
District IX 
• California Chapter, American College of Emergency 
Physicians 
• California Primary Care Association 
• La Clínica de la Raza 
• Community Clinic Association of Los Angeles County 
• California Dental Association 
• California Academy of Family Physicians 
Yes on 35 will help address our urgent healthcare crisis 
and protect healthcare for all California patients. 
www.VoteYes35.com 
Dr. Yasuko Fukuda, Chair 
American Academy of Pediatrics, California 
Jack Yandell, Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) 
International Association of EMTs and Paramedics 
Jodi Hicks, CEO 
Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California 
35
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.  Arguments | 57PROVIDES PERMANENT FUNDING FOR MEDI-CAL 
HEALTH CARE SERVICES. INITIATIVE STATUTE. PROPOSITION
35
★ ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 35  ★
NO ARGUMENT AGAINST 
PROPOSITION 35 WAS SUBMITTED.


• Authorizes $10 billion in state general 
obligation bonds for various projects to reduce 
climate risks and impacts: $3.8 billion for safe 
drinking water and water resilience; $1.95 
billion for wildfire prevention and extreme heat 
mitigation; $1.9 billion for protection of natural 
lands, parks, and wildlife; $1.2 billion for 
protection of coastal lands, bays, and oceans; 
$850 million for clean energy; and $300 million 
for agriculture.
• Prioritizes projects benefitting disadvantaged 
communities.
• Requires annual audits.
• Appropriates money from General Fund to 
repay bonds.SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE ANALYST’S ESTIMATE 
OF NET STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT FISCAL 
IMPACT: 
• Increased state costs of about $400 million 
annually for 40 years to repay the bond.
24 | Title and Summary / AnalysisPROPOSITION AUTHORIZES BONDS FOR SAFE DRINKING WATER, WILDFIRE 
PREVENTION, AND PROTECTING COMMUNITIES AND NATURAL 
LANDS FROM CLIMATE RISKS. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE.4
OFFICIAL TITLE AND SUMMARY PREPARED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
BACKGROUND
State Pays for Natural Resources and Climate 
Activities. The state pays for many activities 
aimed at conserving natural resources, as well 
as responding to the causes and effects of 
climate change (“natural resources and climate 
activities”). These activities focus on increasing 
the amount of water available for use, conserving 
land to benefit fish and wildlife, increasing 
recreational opportunities at state and local 
parks, and other purposes. In some cases, state 
government agencies perform natural resources 
and climate activities. In other cases, the state 
provides grants and loans to local governments, 
not-for-profit organizations, and businesses to 
support similar activities. 
State Pays for Natural Resources and Climate 
Activities in Various Ways. Sometimes the state 
pays up front for natural resources and climate activities with money it already has. In other 
cases, the state pays for these activities by using 
bonds. Bonds are a way that the state borrows 
money and then repays the money plus interest 
over time. (For more information about bonds, 
please see “Overview of State Bond Debt” later in 
this guide.) 
Over the past decade, the state has spent an 
average of about $13 billion each year (annually) 
on natural resources and climate activities. About 
15 percent of this amount has been from bonds. 
The state still has a few billion dollars remaining 
from prior natural resources and climate bonds 
that have not yet been committed for specific 
activities.
Local and Federal Governments Also Pay 
for Similar Activities. In addition to the state 
funding, other entities also pay for natural 
resources and climate activities. For example, ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYSTThe text of this measure can be found on page 75 and the Secretary of State’s website at 
voterguide.sos.ca.gov.
4
State Bond Cost Estimate
Amount borrowed $10 billion
Average repayment cost $400 million 
 per year over  
 40 years
Source of repayment General tax 
 revenue
FINAL VOTES CAST BY THE LEGISLATURE ON SB 867 (PROPOSITION 4)
(CHAPTER 83, STATUTES OF 2024)
Senate: Ayes 33 Noes 6
Assembly: Ayes 66 Noes 6
For the full text of Proposition 4, see page 75.  Analysis | 25ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
in some areas, local governments pay for water 
and energy infrastructure as part of their roles 
as local utilities. Local governments such as 
cities and counties also pay for local parks. The 
federal government also pays for various natural 
resources and climate activities. For example, the 
federal government provides money to improve 
local drinking water systems and to build energy 
infrastructure. 
PROPOSAL
New Bond for Natural Resources and Climate 
Activities. Proposition 4 allows the state to sell a $10 billion bond for natural resources and climate 
activities. Much of the bond money would be used 
for loans and grants to local governments, Native 
American tribes, not-for-profit organizations, and 
businesses. Some bond money also would be 
available for state agencies to spend on state-run 
activities. 
Funding Would Pay for a Variety of Activities. 
As shown in Figure 1, Proposition 4 pays for 
activities within eight broad categories, each with 
different goals. Some of the main activities in each 
category are summarized below:AUTHORIZES BONDS FOR SAFE DRINKING WATER, WILDFIRE 
PREVENTION, AND PROTECTING COMMUNITIES AND NATURAL 
LANDS FROM CLIMATE RISKS. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE.PROPOSITION
4
4

26 | AnalysisANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
• Drought, Flood, and Water Supply 
($3.8 Billion). Roughly half of this money would 
be for activities to increase the amount and 
quality of water available for people to use 
($1.9 billion). This would include storing water 
so it can be used during future droughts, as well 
as cleaning polluted water to make it safe to 
drink. Money would also be used to help reduce 
the risk of floods, such as by repairing dams 
and capturing and reusing stormwater ($1.1 
billion). The rest of the money would be used 
for various activities, such as restoring rivers 
and lakes. 
• Forest Health and Wildfire Prevention 
($1.5 Billion). All of this money would support 
activities to improve the health of forests and 
reduce the risk of severe and destructive 
wildfires. This would include thinning trees 
in forests that are overgrown and clearing 
vegetation near where people live. Money 
would also be used for other activities, such 
as helping homeowners make their properties 
more resistant to wildfire damage. 
• Sea-Level Rise and Coastal Areas ($1.2 Billion). 
Most of this money would pay for activities to 
restore coastal areas and protect them from the 
effects of rising sea levels ($890 million). This 
could include restoring wetlands so they can 
serve as buffers to rising sea levels. The rest 
of this money would be used to improve ocean 
habitats and protect fish and other marine 
wildlife ($310 million).
• Land Conservation and Habitat Restoration 
($1.2 Billion). This money would be used to 
protect and restore land for the benefit of fish 
and wildlife. For example, it could support 
purchasing land to set aside so that it is not 
developed.
• Energy Infrastructure ($850 Million). More 
than half of this money would support the 
development of wind turbines off the California 
coast ($475 million). Most of the remaining 
money would pay for building infrastructure such as transmission lines to carry electricity 
long distances ($325 million). The rest of the 
money would pay for projects to build large 
batteries that store electricity for when it is 
needed ($50 million).
• Parks ($700 Million). The bulk of this money 
would support various activities that expand 
recreational opportunities at parks or reduce 
the impacts of climate change on parks 
($300 million). These activities could include 
adding new trails and parking areas. Some 
of this money would provide grants to local 
communities to build new parks or renovate 
existing parks ($200 million). The rest of this 
money would be used to repair state parks and 
provide nature education ($200 million).
• Extreme Heat ($450 Million). Much of this 
money would pay for activities focused on 
protecting communities from extreme heat 
($200 million). These activities could include 
adding trees and greenspaces. Money would 
also support places for people to go during 
heatwaves or disasters ($100 million). The rest 
of the money would provide grants for local 
communities to conduct activities that provide 
environmental benefits, such as reducing air 
pollution ($150 million).
• Farms and Agriculture ($300 Million). Much 
of this money would be used for activities that 
encourage farmers to improve soil health, 
reduce air pollution, and use less water 
($105 million). This money would also support 
community gardens and farmers’ markets, 
such as by purchasing shade canopies 
($60 million). The rest of this money would 
support a range of other activities, such as 
purchasing vans to transport farmworkers and 
conserving farmland. 
Establishes Other Requirements for the Use of 
Funds. Proposition 4 requires the bond money 
to be used in certain ways. For example, at least 
40 percent of bond money must be used for 
activities that directly benefit communities that PROPOSITION AUTHORIZES BONDS FOR SAFE DRINKING WATER, WILDFIRE 
PREVENTION, AND PROTECTING COMMUNITIES AND NATURAL 
LANDS FROM CLIMATE RISKS. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE.4
4
For the full text of Proposition 4, see page 75.  Analysis | 27ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
have lower incomes or are more vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change. Proposition 4 also 
requires regular public reporting of how the bond 
money is spent. 
FISCAL EFFECTS
Increased State Costs of About $400 Million 
Annually for 40 Years to Repay the Bond. The 
estimated cost to repay the bond would be about 
$400 million annually over a 40-year period. 
Payments would be made from the state General 
Fund. (The General Fund is the account the state 
uses to pay for most public services, including 
education, health care, and prisons.) This would 
be less than one-half of 1 percent of the state’s 
total General Fund budget. Since the state has 
to pay interest on the money it borrows, the total 
cost of the bond would be about 10 percent more 
(after adjusting for inflation) than if the state paid 
up front with money it already has. 
Likely Reduced Local Costs for Natural Resources 
and Climate Activities. The availability of state 
bond funds could have various fiscal effects on 
local governments. In some cases, the additional 
state funding could replace local government 
money that would otherwise be needed to pay for 
a project. For example, this could include using 
bond funds to help support an essential water 
treatment facility the local government otherwise 
would have needed to fund by itself. In other cases, however, the availability of state funds 
could encourage local governments to spend 
more money to build larger projects than they 
otherwise would. For example, this could include 
adding additional amenities to a local park. On 
net, Proposition 4 likely would result in savings to 
local governments. The amount of these savings 
is uncertain but could average tens of millions of 
dollars annually over the next few decades. 
Potential State and Local Savings if Funding 
Prevents Disasters. To the extent the bond funds 
result in completing activities that reduce the 
risk or amount of damage from disasters, it could 
reduce state and local costs for responding to 
and recovering from those events. For example, 
improving a levee could reduce the amount of 
flooding that occurs. Additionally, thinning trees in 
a forest could reduce the severity of wildfires. The 
amount of such potential savings is uncertain. 
Visit sos.ca.gov/campaign-lobbying/cal-access-
resources/measure-contributions/2024-
ballot-measure-contribution-totals for a list 
of committees primarily formed to support or 
oppose this measure.
Visit fppc.ca.gov/transparency/
top-contributors.html 
to access the committee’s top 10 contributors. 4AUTHORIZES BONDS FOR SAFE DRINKING WATER, WILDFIRE 
PREVENTION, AND PROTECTING COMMUNITIES AND NATURAL 
LANDS FROM CLIMATE RISKS. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE.PROPOSITION
4
4
28 | Arguments Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency. PROPOSITION AUTHORIZES BONDS FOR SAFE DRINKING WATER, WILDFIRE 
PREVENTION, AND PROTECTING COMMUNITIES AND NATURAL 
LANDS FROM CLIMATE RISKS. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE.4
★ ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 4  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 4  ★
Clean drinking water and preventing destructive wildfires 
are necessities, not luxuries. These should be addressed 
within our state budget, not by demanding $10 billion more 
from the taxpayers in the form of a bond that will cost nearly 
double to repay—$19.3 billion.
The challenges we face with wildfires and water supply are 
the result of decades of neglect and mismanagement of our 
resources. Empowering tribal leaders for forest management 
and investing in water infrastructure could have prevented 
these crises. These aren’t random occurrences, but 
repercussions of misguided policies.
Despite politicians’ frequent promises for accountability, 
since 2000 California voters have approved over $30 billion 
in natural resources bonds—with little to show. After years 
of refusing to prioritize spending on forest management, 
we are suffering the aftermath of major wildfires that could 
have been prevented, or at least minimized. After years 
of refusing to invest in water storage, we are facing water 
supply instability.Instead of burdening taxpayers with a bond that 
overpromises, we should tackle these issues in the budget. 
Real change stems from commitment, not quick fixes. This 
isn’t just policy, it’s our future. Let’s choose pragmatism 
over procrastination. 
Sacramento politicians should not demand more money 
from the taxpayers or pressure voters to pass an unrealistic 
bond package that lacks any lasting change to state policy. 
Vote NO on Proposition 4. 
Vote NO on deferring our environmental responsibility at 
double the cost. Let’s invest in a greener tomorrow today. 
Senate Minority Leader Brian W. Jones 
Assemblyman Jim Patterson 
Jon Coupal, President 
Howard Jarvis Taxpayers AssociationYES on 4: TO CLEAN AND PROTECT OUR DRINKING 
WATER, PREVENT WILDFIRES 
Prop. 4 makes urgent, commonsense investments to protect 
our communities, health, economy, and natural resources 
by: 
• Cleaning up and protecting water supplies • Preventing 
devastating wildfires • Protecting forests, beaches, fresh 
water sources, and wildlife habitat 
Voting Yes on 4 is urgently needed. California faces 
increasing threats from wildfires, water pollution, and 
extreme heat. Investments today can prevent future costs 
and damage from a changing climate and more frequent 
natural disasters. 
PROVIDING CLEAN, SAFE DRINKING WATER 
Prop. 4 will clean up and protect California’s drinking water 
supplies in all regions of California—remove toxic pollutants 
from our drinking water, addressing infrastructure risks like 
weakened dams and levees, and increasing supplies. 
Today, nearly 1 million Californians lack access to drinking 
water that meets safety and reliability standards, according 
to the State Water Board. Yes on 4 helps ensure we all have 
safe water to drink. 
PREVENTING DEVASTATING WILDFIRES AND SMOKE 
Recent California wildfires have burned 2 million acres, 
released toxic smoke into our air, and polluted drinking 
water supplies. Fire damage and smoke have harmed 
quality of life and health, including children’s lungs, in every 
corner of California. Prop. 4 invests in projects to prevent 
wildfires, reduce their intensity when they do occur, and 
improve disaster response.
“Giving firefighters the tools to prevent wildfires is the 
best, most cost effective way to prevent the human and 
financial costs of these disasters. Prop. 4 makes the 
right investments to save lives and billions in response 
and recovery costs. ”—Tim Edwards, President, CALFIRE 
Firefighters PROTECTING FORESTS, BEACHES, RIVERS, STREAMS, 
AND WILDLIFE 
Our beaches, forests, and mountains make California 
special, and we have a responsibility to protect them for 
our children and future generations. Protecting natural 
areas and wildlife is more urgent today than ever before, 
as we lose wildlife habitat, farm and ranchland, and even 
beaches wash away. Prop. 4 protects these natural areas 
from wildfire, pollution, and other threats from a changing 
climate. 
PROTECTING PUBLIC HEALTH 
By removing pollution from the air and toxins from our 
water, Prop. 4 protects the health of vulnerable seniors and 
children. 
STRONG FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY, ACCOUNTABILITY & 
TRANSPARENCY 
California is already paying the price for failing to adequately 
prepare for drought and a changing climate. This measure 
helps shift from disaster response to prevention. 
Our state and communities will save billions more by 
avoiding and reducing damage from wildfires, droughts, and 
floods. 
Prop. 4 contains strict fiscal accountability and 
transparency: 
• Annual independent audits • Full public disclosure of all 
future funding 
Join California firefighters (CalFire Local 2881), the National 
Wildlife Federation, the Nature Conservancy, Clean Water 
Action, and water agencies including San Diego Co Water 
Authority: YES on 4. 
Jennifer Clary, State Director
Clean Water Action 
Tim Edwards, President
CALFIRE Firefighters 
Beth Pratt, California Regional Executive Director
National Wildlife Federation
4
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.  Arguments | 29AUTHORIZES BONDS FOR SAFE DRINKING WATER, WILDFIRE 
PREVENTION, AND PROTECTING COMMUNITIES AND NATURAL 
LANDS FROM CLIMATE RISKS. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE.PROPOSITION
4
★ ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 4  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 4  ★
YES on 4: ADDRESSES CALIFORNIA’S HIGHEST PRIORITY 
DRINKING WATER and FIRE PREVENTION NEEDS 
California firefighters, clean water organizations, public 
health experts, and conservation groups urge YES on 4, to 
address our state’s most vital needs for a safe water supply, 
wildfire prevention, and clean air.
The opposition itself admits, clean water and wildfire 
prevention are critical priorities. 
Prop. 4 makes efficient, sensible investments in proven 
solutions: upgrading drinking water treatment to remove 
contaminants, fixing crumbling dams and levees to prevent 
floods, creating groundwater storage and recycling plants 
to boost supply and prepare for drought, and investing in 
effective wildfire prevention and containment strategies. 
YES on 4: SMART, URGENT INVESTMENTS WITH 
STRICT ACCOUNTABILITY REQUIREMENTS, PROTECTS 
COMMUNITIES AND PREVENTS BILLIONS IN FUTURE 
COSTS 
Yes on 4 is fiscally responsible and fully transparent. 
Nearly 1 million Californians lack access to clean drinking 
water. Yes on 4’s investments strengthen safe water supplies and flood control infrastructure—saving billions in 
temporary fixes and economic losses. 
A UCLA study found 10 years of wildfire smoke have caused 
50,000 premature deaths and $400 billion in economic 
losses. Wildfire prevention saves six times its cost in 
reduced damage, while protecting our health. 
“California’s financial health is vulnerable to natural 
disasters, neglected infrastructure, and a changing climate. 
Without raising taxes, Yes on Prop. 4 saves California money 
while helping state and local governments protect our 
communities. ”—Tim Gage, former state Director of Finance. 
California communities can’t wait. 
YES on 4: CLEAN DRINKING WATER, WILDFIRE 
PREVENTION, and OUR HEALTH. 
Susana De Anda, Executive Director
Community Water Center
Sarah Gibson, Fire Manager
The Nature Conservancy 
Christopher Chavez, Deputy Policy Director
Coalition for Clean Air TOO MUCH DEBT, TOO LITTLE BENEFIT: THE PROBLEM 
WITH PROPOSITION 4 
Bonds are the most expensive way for the government 
to pay for things. Proposition 4 would add a whopping 
$10 billion of debt to the taxpayers—PLUS an estimated 
$9.3 billion in interest—to pay for climate-related programs. 
This funding would also cover administrative costs and 
salaries for grant recipients. But remember, this is borrowed 
money. 
At the start of the year, California already had over 
$78 billion of bond debt. Proposition 1 in March added 
another $6.38 billion. Now there’s a proposal to add an 
additional $10 billion for ambiguous climate programs. 
Guess who’s going to foot the bill? That’s right—we 
taxpayers. Our tax dollars will be diverted from essential 
services to cover interest payments and principal repayment 
of the bond.
Bonds are borrowed money that must be paid back, PLUS 
INTEREST, no matter what the state must cut to do it. 
Governor Newsom already declared a budget emergency 
because the state spends more than it takes in. How 
many programs will have to be cut in the future to pay for 
Proposition 4? According to the nonpartisan Legislative 
Analyst’s Office, we had a $62 billion deficit this year. What 
will happen when we have both a deficit AND the obligation 
to repay this enormous bond debt?
Two years ago, California had a nearly $100 billion 
SURPLUS. If these climate projects had been prioritized 
then, we could have covered the entire cost of this bond 
with just 10 percent of that surplus. Now, due to the 
government’s inability to manage its spending, they are 
asking voters for more of their hard-earned money. AS A VOTER, YOUR TAX DOLLARS SHOULD FUND YOUR 
HIGHEST PRIORITIES, NOT PET PROJECTS. 
Bonds should be reserved for financing essential projects 
that will build infrastructure lasting beyond the 30-year 
payoff period. However, many elements of Proposition 4 fail 
to meet that standard, resulting in $10 billion of spending 
just being added to the taxpayers’ credit card—with a 
lack of accountability or measured metrics for success! 
Proposition 4 is full of money being funneled to unproven 
technologies that may sound promising on paper but have 
no concrete evidence of success. By committing funds to 
speculative projects, Proposition 4 overlooks long-term 
water storage and critical wildfire fuel management 
programs in favor of short-term, unproven projects. 
IT’S RECKLESS TO USE COSTLY BORROWED MONEY TO 
PAY FOR UNPROVEN PROGRAMS.
Proposition 4 represents a reckless increase in state 
debt with questionable benefits. The government should 
prioritize essential services and ensure that any borrowing 
is reserved for projects that provide lasting, tangible 
benefits to the state and its residents. Vital programs 
should be funded in the budget with the taxes we already 
pay, not through costly borrowing. What’s in the budget 
that’s a higher priority than safe drinking water and wildfire 
prevention? Politicians should answer that question before 
racking up another $10 + billion in debt that will have to be 
paid back, WITH INTEREST. 
Senate Minority Leader Brian W. Jones 
Assemblyman Jim Patterson 
Jon Coupal, President 
Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association


30 | Title and Summary / AnalysisPROPOSITION ALLOWS LOCAL BONDS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND 
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE WITH 55% VOTER APPROVAL. 
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.5
OFFICIAL TITLE AND SUMMARY PREPARED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
BACKGROUND
Housing Is Expensive in California. A typical 
California home currently costs around twice 
the national average. Similarly, renters in 
California typically pay about 50 percent more 
for housing than renters in other states. 
Local Programs Help Pay for Housing. Some 
programs help low-income Californians afford 
housing. For example, governments help pay 
for housing reserved for low-income residents. 
Other programs provide housing and services 
to specific groups. Examples of such groups include people with disabilities or those at 
risk of chronic homelessness. We refer to 
affordable and supportive housing programs 
as “housing assistance. ”
Local Governments Also Pay for Public 
Infrastructure. Examples of infrastructure 
projects paid for by local governments include 
roads, hospitals, fire stations, libraries, and 
water treatment facilities. 
Local Governments Often Use Bonds to Pay 
for Housing Assistance Programs and Public • Allows local bonds for affordable housing 
for low- and middle-income Californians, 
or for public infrastructure including roads, 
water, and fire protection to be approved 
by 55% of voters, rather than current 
two-thirds approval requirement.
• Bonds must include specified 
accountability requirements, including 
citizens oversight committee and annual 
independent financial and performance 
audits. 
• Allows local governments to assess 
property taxes above 1% to repay 
affordable housing and infrastructure bonds if approved by 55% of voters instead 
of current two-thirds approval requirement.
SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE ANALYST’S ESTIMATE 
OF NET STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT FISCAL 
IMPACT: 
• Increased local borrowing to fund 
affordable housing, supportive housing, 
and public infrastructure. The amount of 
increased borrowing would depend on 
decisions by local governments and voters. 
Borrowed funds would be repaid with 
higher property taxes.
ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYSTThe text of this measure can be found on page 94 and the Secretary of State’s website at 
voterguide.sos.ca.gov.
5
FINAL VOTES CAST BY THE LEGISLATURE ON ACA 1 (PROPOSITION 5)
(CHAPTER 173, STATUTES OF 2023)
Senate: Ayes 29 Noes 10
Assembly: Ayes 55 Noes 12
FINAL VOTES CAST BY THE LEGISLATURE ON ACA 10 (PROPOSITION 5)
(CHAPTER 134, STATUTES OF 2024)
Senate: Ayes 31 Noes 8
Assembly: Ayes 54 Noes 8
For the full text of Proposition 5, see page 94.  Analysis | 31ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
Infrastructure. Bonds are a way for local 
governments to borrow money and then repay 
it plus interest over time. Similar to the way 
a family pays off a mortgage on their home, 
bonds allow governments to spread costs over 
a few decades. 
Certain Bonds Require Two-Thirds Approval 
of Local Voters. For cities, counties, and 
special districts, bonds paid for by increased 
property taxes typically require two-thirds of 
local voters to approve them. These are called 
general obligation bonds.
PROPOSAL
Proposition 5 changes the rules in the 
California Constitution for approving certain 
local government general obligation bonds. 
It also requires local governments to monitor 
the use of revenues in specific ways. 
Lowers Voter Approval Requirement for 
Certain Bonds. Proposition 5 lowers the 
voting requirement needed to approve local 
general obligation bonds if they would fund 
housing assistance or public infrastructure. 
Specifically, Proposition 5 lowers the voter 
approval requirement from two-thirds to 
55 percent. 
Requires Specific Oversight Activities. 
Proposition 5 requires local governments 
to take specific steps to monitor the use of 
bond funds supporting housing assistance 
and public infrastructure. For example, local 
governments would need to conduct annual 
independent financial and performance 
audits. Citizens’ oversight committees 
also would be appointed to help supervise 
spending. FISCAL EFFECTS
Certain Local Bonds More Likely to Pass. 
A lower voter approval requirement would 
make it easier to pass local general obligation 
bonds for housing assistance and public 
infrastructure. Recent local election results 
suggest that an additional 20 percent to 
50 percent of local bond measures would 
have passed under Proposition 5’s lower voter 
approval requirement. Those measures would 
have raised a couple billion dollars over many 
years. A lower voter approval requirement 
also could mean local governments propose 
more measures.
Increased Local Funding for Housing 
Assistance and Public Infrastructure. An 
increase in the approval of local bonds 
could increase funding available for housing 
assistance and public infrastructure. The 
amount of this increase is not clear. Based 
on recent trends, it could be at least a couple 
billion dollars over many years. The amount 
of the increase would vary across local 
governments. If local voters approve more 
bonds, local governments also would have 
more borrowing costs. These costs would be 
paid with higher property taxes. Ultimately, 
any future bond approval would depend on 
decisions by local governments and voters.
Visit sos.ca.gov/campaign-lobbying/cal-access-
resources/measure-contributions/2024-
ballot-measure-contribution-totals for a list 
of committees primarily formed to support or 
oppose this measure.
Visit fppc.ca.gov/transparency/
top-contributors.html 
to access the committee’s top 10 contributors. ALLOWS LOCAL BONDS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND 
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE WITH 55% VOTER APPROVAL. 
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.PROPOSITION
5
5
5
32 | Arguments Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency. ★ ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 5  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 5  ★
NO ON PROP. 5: MORE GOVERNMENT DEBT AND HIGHER 
PROPERTY TAXES 
Politicians claim they need Prop. 5 to make it easier to pass 
bonds, but they don’t tell you bonds are not free. Bonds are 
debt. A $20 billion bond costs $30 billion to repay—and it’s 
paid off with higher property taxes.
NO ON PROP. 5: A TRICK TO USE TAXPAYERS AS A CREDIT 
CARD 
The politicians in Sacramento turned a $100 billion surplus 
into a $73 billion deficit in just two years. Now, they want 
to use local taxpayers as a credit card to keep spending. 
They want you to pay for affordable housing and other 
“infrastructure” projects with higher property taxes. 
NO ON PROP. 5: LOOPHOLES THAT GO BEYOND 
“INFRASTRUCTURE”
Politicians say Prop. 5 will build “infrastructure,” but the fine 
print defines “infrastructure” so broadly that it can include 
just about anything they want to fund on the backs of local 
taxpayers. NO ON PROP. 5: MORE WASTEFUL SPENDING 
Politicians say Prop. 5 is needed to build “affordable” 
housing, but they don’t tell you their version of affordable 
housing costs as much as $1 million per unit and comes with 
expensive state mandates. 
NO ON PROP. 5: HIGHER TAXES, HIGHER RENTS, HIGHER 
PRICES 
Since 1879, California has required a 2/3 majority 
approval to approve most bonds. Prop. 5 reduces that 
threshold—meaning more debt and higher property taxes 
for homeowners, higher rents for renters, higher costs to 
farmers, and higher prices for everything we buy and use. 
Don’t trust the politicians. Vote NO on Prop. 5.
Jon Coupal, President
Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association
Rev. Dwight E. Williams, Chairman
California Senior Alliance
Greg Van Dyke, President
California Consumer Advocates for Affordability and SafetyVOTE YES ON PROP. 5 
Prop. 5 gives local voters more control over funding 
for affordable housing and vital infrastructure projects 
including roads, bridges, local fire protection and water 
systems. Without raising taxes, Prop. 5 shifts local public 
policy decisions and spending priorities away from state 
government, giving local voters and taxpayers more tools, 
more power, and greater autonomy to address those issues 
in their own communities.
PROP. 5: AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR LOW‑ AND MIDDLE‑
INCOME CALIFORNIANS 
We have a massive shortage of affordable housing for low‑ 
and middle‑income Californians. The high cost of housing 
consumes too much of our paychecks, and many middle‑
class families are being pushed out of the communities 
where they work and where their children go to school. 
Prop. 5 gives local communities more tools to make 
housing more affordable, including: • Providing first‑time 
homebuyers’ programs; • Building new housing, including 
affordable for ‑sale ownership and rental housing, for low‑ 
and middle‑income Californians, seniors, veterans, and 
homeless families; and • Renovating and repairing existing 
affordable housing. 
PROP. 5: LOCAL PROJECTS SUPPORTING NEW HOUSING 
AND SAFE COMMUNITIES 
In addition to affordable housing, Prop. 5 makes it easier 
for local voters who choose to invest in safety repairs and 
improvements to bridges, roads, public transportation, 
water systems, and other critical public infrastructure 
as they see fit. Local voters can also approve bonds for 
emergency preparedness, including local fire stations and 
engines, ambulances, and early‑warning systems for natural 
disasters. Prop. 5 trusts local voters to prioritize what’s most 
important in their communities. 
PROP. 5: LOCAL CONTROL. INCREASED ACCOUNTABILITY 
Prop. 5 does not raise taxes. It simply gives voters more power to address the unique needs of their communities 
without relying on the state, which has not met the 
challenges facing most California families. 
But with increased control, comes increased accountability, 
transparency, and oversight to ensure that these programs 
truly deliver results. To increase protection of local tax 
dollars, qualifying bond measures have strict accountability 
requirements including: • A clear list of the specific types 
of projects to be funded. • All funding must be spent to 
benefit the jurisdiction that approves the bonds, ensuring 
that local taxpayers benefit. • Caps on administrative costs 
so resources are used for the projects local taxpayers voted 
for. • Independent performance and financial audits of 
spending must be posted publicly and reviewed by the State 
Auditor. • Strict conflict of interest checks for local officials. 
• Oversight by an independent citizens committee. 
For years, local voters have known what challenges their 
communities face, and how best to address those issues. 
Voting Yes on Prop. 5 empowers local voters to make 
decisions about what their communities need, and makes 
it easier to solve those local problems, with less reliance 
on state government which has proven to be too slow 
and unable to address the critical needs of our individual 
communities. 
Prop. 5 trusts local voters to know what’s best for their own 
communities when faced with affordable housing shortages 
and other infrastructure challenges, and gives them the tools 
to invest in their own local solutions. 
Vote Yes on Prop. 5. 
Brian K. Rice, President
California Professional Firefighters
Christopher Carson, President
League of Women Voters of California
Leah Miller, Chairperson
Habitat for Humanity CaliforniaPROPOSITION ALLOWS LOCAL BONDS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND  
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE WITH 55% VOTER APPROVAL.  
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.5
5
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.  Arguments | 33★ ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 5  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 5  ★
YES ON PROP. 5 DOES NOT RAISE TAXES: Prop. 5 simply 
shifts local public policy decisions and spending priorities 
away from state government, giving local voters and 
taxpayers more tools and greater autonomy to address 
issues in their own communities. Unlike statewide bond 
measures, Prop. 5 requires that projects funded by local 
taxpayers must benefit local taxpayers, and gives more 
power to those communities that choose to use Prop. 5 to 
solve real problems.
PROP. 5 IS NOT A BOND OR A TAX: Prop. 5 finally gives local 
communities the choice to address critical infrastructure 
needs if supported by a super ‑majority of local voters. 
Whether it’s making it easier for first‑time homebuyers, 
seniors, veterans, and working families to afford housing, 
or fixing the local roads and bridges that families depend 
upon for safe travel to and from work and school, Prop. 5 
empowers local voters to solve local problems. 
PROP. 5 REQUIRES INCREASED ACCOUNTABILITY: For 
those communities that choose to utilize Prop. 5, strict taxpayer protections will be mandatory, including: • A list of 
projects to be funded. • Caps on administrative costs and 
strict conflict of interest rules. • Independent audits made 
public, and a trained local citizens oversight committee. 
VOTE YES ON PROP. 5: Voters have always known what 
challenges their communities face and how best to 
address important issues including housing affordability, 
water systems, road repair, fire stations, and other critical 
infrastructure needs. Prop. 5 will empower local voters with 
the choice and the tools to solve those challenges.
Daniel Parra, President
League of California Cities
John Valencia, President
Middle Class Taxpayers Association
Michelle Gutierrez Vo, President
California Nurses AssociationNO ON PROP. 5: WRITTEN BY POLITICIANS TO INCREASE 
DEBT AND RAISE TAXES 
Prop. 5 changes the constitutional requirements that 
have existed for 145 years by reducing the voter approval 
requirements to pass bonds. Prop. 5 makes it easier for 
cities, counties, and special districts to increase property 
taxes to pay for our already massive debt levels in California. 
Increased debt, combined with skyrocketing interest rates, 
means HIGHER PROPERTY TAXES ultimately paid for by 
every Californian.
NO ON PROP. 5: EVEN MORE UNSUSTAINABLE DEBT 
California already has more debt than any other state, with 
more than $500 billion in state and local debt. When this 
debt is added to the state’s total unfunded liabilities, it 
totals a staggering $1.6 TRILLION. Prop. 5 puts taxpayers 
on the hook for even more—saddling future generations with 
the bill! 
NO ON PROP. 5: HIGHER TAXES, HIGHER RENTS, HIGHER 
PRICES 
Bonds are not free money. Like a loan, mortgage, or credit 
card debt, bonds have to be paid back—with interest. 
Interest charges turn a $20 billion bond into a $30 billion 
tax after principal and interest—and TAXPAYERS PAY those 
costs through higher property taxes. 
Higher property taxes mean higher house payments for 
homeowners, higher rents for renters, higher costs to 
farmers, and higher prices for everything we buy since local 
businesses will have to pass their higher property taxes on 
to consumers. 
NO ON PROP. 5: SHIFTS STATE BURDEN TO LOCAL 
TAXPAYERS 
The politicians in Sacramento have made a mess with 
their financial mismanagement and wasteful spending, 
turning a $100 billion surplus into a $73 billion deficit with 
unsustainable spending. Prop. 5 allows politicians to cover 
up their mess by shifting the costs for state programs to local taxpayers. And Prop. 5 was written to define “infrastructure” 
so broadly that it can include just about anything the 
politicians and special interests want to fund on the backs 
of taxpayers. 
PROP. 5: BEWARE THE FINE PRINT 
The politicians who wrote Prop. 5 even snuck in a provision 
buried in the fine print that would make it RETROACTIVE—
meaning that any bond passed this November would only 
need a lower vote total to pass. Normally, when voters 
approve a measure on the ballot, it doesn’t go into law until 
after the election results are certified. By making Prop. 5 
retroactive, they hope to saddle taxpayers with billions in 
new taxes and debt immediately. That means taxpayers 
could see their property taxes skyrocket right away. 
NO ON PROP. 5: IT WILL MAKE EVERYTHING MORE 
EXPENSIVE 
Californians already struggle with the highest cost of living 
in the nation. We already pay the highest income, sales, and 
gas taxes in the country, and Prop. 5 will lead to even higher 
property taxes and higher costs for everyone. Homeowners 
will be hit with higher taxes, renters with higher rent, and 
consumers with higher prices on everything from food to gas 
and utilities to services.
PROP. 5 will make everything more expensive when 
Californians can least afford it. 
NO on PROP. 5.
Robert Gutierrez, President
California Taxpayers Association
Julian Canete, President
California Hispanic Chambers of Commerce
Kendra Moss, Advisory Member
Women Veterans AllianceALLOWS LOCAL BONDS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND 
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE WITH 55% VOTER APPROVAL. 
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.PROPOSITION
5


34 | Title and Summary / AnalysisPROPOSITION ELIMINATES CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION ALLOWING 
INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDE FOR INCARCERATED PERSONS. 
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.6
OFFICIAL TITLE AND SUMMARY PREPARED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
BACKGROUND
“Involuntary Servitude” Banned 
Except as a Punishment for Crime. The 
California Constitution bans involuntary 
servitude except as a punishment 
for crime. The Constitution does not 
define involuntary servitude. However, 
involuntary servitude commonly refers 
to forcing people to work against their 
will. 
Some People in State Prison and 
County Jail Work. People in prison and 
jail can be required to work or do other activities such as taking classes. Work 
includes jobs like cooking, cleaning, or 
other tasks needed to run prisons and 
jails. Roughly one-third of people in 
prison work. Many of these workers are 
paid less than $1 per hour. Workers can 
also earn “time credits” that reduce 
the amount of time they serve in prison 
or jail. People who refuse to work or do 
other activities can face consequences 
such as losing the ability to make 
regular phone calls.• Amends the California Constitution 
to remove the current constitutional 
provision that allows jails and prisons 
to impose involuntary servitude 
to punish crime (i.e., forcing 
incarcerated persons to work). 
• Prohibits the California Department 
of Corrections and Rehabilitation 
from punishing incarcerated persons 
for refusing a work assignment. 
Allows incarcerated persons to 
voluntarily accept work assignments 
in exchange for credit to reduce their 
sentences. SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE ANALYST’S 
ESTIMATE OF NET STATE AND LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT FISCAL IMPACT: 
• Potential increase or decrease in 
state and local criminal justice costs, 
depending on how rules around work 
for people in state prison and county 
jail change. Any effect likely would 
not exceed the tens of millions of 
dollars annually.
ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYSTThe text of this measure can be found on page 97 and the Secretary of State’s website at 
voterguide.sos.ca.gov.
6
FINAL VOTES CAST BY THE LEGISLATURE ON ACA 8 (PROPOSITION 6)
(CHAPTER 133, STATUTES OF 2024)
Senate: Ayes 33 Noes 3
Assembly: Ayes 68 Noes 0
For the full text of Proposition 6, see page 97.  Analysis | 35ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
PROPOSAL
Bans Involuntary Servitude as a 
Punishment for Crime. Proposition 6 
changes the Constitution to ban 
involuntary servitude as a punishment 
for crime. It also bans state prisons 
from disciplining people who refuse to 
work. However, Proposition 6 states 
it does not stop prisons from giving 
people time credits for working. 
FISCAL EFFECTS
Potential Increase or Decrease in State 
and Local Criminal Justice Costs. 
The fiscal effects of Proposition 6 
on state and local criminal justice 
costs are uncertain. This is because it 
would depend on how Proposition 6 
would change rules around work for 
people in state prison and county 
jail and how people would respond 
to those changes. For example, if 
people in prison and jail no longer face 
consequences for refusing to work, prisons and/or jails might have to find 
other ways to encourage working. If 
this is done by increasing pay, costs 
would increase. If this is done by giving 
more time credits instead, costs would 
decrease because people would serve 
less time. Any potential increase or 
decrease in state and local criminal 
justice costs likely would not exceed 
the tens of millions of dollars each year 
(annually). This amount is less than 
one-half of 1 percent of the state’s total 
General Fund budget. (The General 
Fund is the account the state uses to 
pay for most public services, including 
education, health care, and prisons.) 
Visit sos.ca.gov/campaign-lobbying/cal-access-
resources/measure-contributions/2024-
ballot-measure-contribution-totals for a list 
of committees primarily formed to support or 
oppose this measure.
Visit fppc.ca.gov/transparency/
top-contributors.html 
to access the committee’s top 10 contributors. ELIMINATES CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION ALLOWING 
INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDE FOR INCARCERATED PERSONS. 
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.PROPOSITION
6
6
6
36 | Arguments Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency. PROPOSITION ELIMINATES CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION ALLOWING 
INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDE FOR INCARCERATED PERSONS. 
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.6
★ ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 6  ★
Proposition 6: Ending Slavery in California’s 
Carceral System 
VOTE YES on PROPOSITION 6. Proposition 6 
eliminates all forms of slavery and involuntary 
servitude within California, ensuring no person is 
subjected to such conditions regardless of their 
confinement circumstances. 
PROPOSITION 6 RESTORES HUMAN DIGNITY 
BY ENDING FORCED LABOR, WHICH 
CONSTITUTES SLAVERY AND VIOLATES 
HUMAN RIGHTS. Incarcerated people should 
have dignity and the agency to pursue a 
rehabilitative path because forced labor serves 
no rehabilitative purpose. This amendment 
focuses on the moral imperative of allowing 
voluntary work assignments, emphasizing the 
importance of human rights. 
PROPOSITION 6 ENHANCES PUBLIC SAFETY 
BY PRIORITIZING REHABILITATION. Forced 
labor in prisons is cruel and unfair, often 
leading to harsh punishments like violence, 
solitary confinement, and denial of services. 
These practices undermine rehabilitation 
and increase the likelihood of reoffending. In 
contrast, Proposition 6 expands voluntary prison 
work programs and ensures dignity, choice, 
and rehabilitation. Incarcerated individuals will 
voluntarily take part in education, job training, 
and other programs that help prevent crimes 
against Californians. 
ENDING SLAVERY IS A BIPARTISAN PRIORITY 
WITH WIDESPREAD SUPPORT. ACA 8, now 
known as Proposition 6, passed unanimously 
in the Assembly (68-0) and with overwhelming 
approval in the Senate (33-3). California is 
one of 16 states that still allow this practice, 
highlighting the urgent need for reform. PROPOSITION 6 SUPPORTS THE NATIONAL 
MOVEMENT BY CLOSING THE LOOPHOLE 
IN CALIFORNIA’S VERSION OF THE 13TH 
AMENDMENT. While it does not change federal 
law, it upholds justice by preventing forced 
labor in California. Voluntary work programs 
reduce recidivism by offering skill development 
and rehabilitation, aiding formerly incarcerated 
individuals in reintegrating into society. 
Productive work, rooted in dignity, allows 
reintegration by letting formerly incarcerated 
people use their work experiences as proof of 
their efforts. 
Many states have amended their constitutions to 
close the loopholes that allow forced labor and 
involuntary servitude under certain conditions. 
This includes significant voter support: over 
66% in Colorado (2018), over 80% in Utah, 
and over 68% in Nebraska (2020). In 2022, 
similar measures saw over 76% approval in 
Alabama, over 55% in Oregon, over 79% in 
Tennessee, and over 88% in Vermont. Nevada 
is also referring this issue to voters for the 
2024 election. Additionally, federal legislators 
are moving this session to close the loophole 
in the 13th Amendment with Senate Joint 
Resolution 33, introduced by Senators Jeff 
Merkley and Cory Booker, and House Joint 
Resolution 72 by Representative Nikema 
Williams. 
Lori Wilson, Assemblymember
California Legislature 
Dolores Huerta, Executive Director
Dolores Huerta Foundation 
Stephen Downing, Deputy Chief (Ret.)
Law Enforcement Action Partnership
6
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.  Arguments | 37ELIMINATES CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION ALLOWING 
INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDE FOR INCARCERATED PERSONS. 
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.PROPOSITION
6
★ ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 6  ★
NO ARGUMENT AGAINST 
PROPOSITION 6 WAS SUBMITTED.


14 | Title and Summary / AnalysisPROPOSITION AUTHORIZES BONDS FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY 
COLLEGE FACILITIES. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE. 2
OFFICIAL TITLE AND SUMMARY PREPARED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
BACKGROUND
California Has Many Public Schools 
and Community Colleges. Currently, 
there are about 10,000 public 
schools statewide (including about 
1,300 charter schools). These schools 
serve elementary through high school 
students. Local school districts govern 
most of these public schools. California also has 115 local community colleges 
that offer associate degrees and other 
programs for adults. Local community 
college districts govern these colleges. 
School and community college districts 
usually build new facilities when they 
are growing in enrollment and need 
additional space. They renovate existing 
facilities when those facilities are old or 
unsafe. ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYSTThe text of this measure can be found on page 70 and the Secretary of State’s website at 
voterguide.sos.ca.gov.
• Authorizes $10 billion in state general 
obligation bonds for repair, upgrade, 
and construction of facilities at K–12 
public schools (including charter 
schools) and community colleges.   
• Provides funding for new facilities, 
to improve school health and safety 
conditions at existing facilities, and 
for classroom upgrades (e.g., science, 
engineering, transitional kindergarten, 
and vocational classrooms).
• Expands eligibility for financial 
hardship grants for small and 
disadvantaged school districts.
• Provides higher percentage of 
state matching funds to schools 
demonstrating greatest need.• Requires public hearings and 
performance audits.
• Appropriates money from General 
Fund to repay bonds.
SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE ANALYST’S ESTIMATE 
OF NET STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT FISCAL 
IMPACT: 
• Increased state costs of about 
$500 million annually for 35 years to 
repay the bond.
State Bond Cost Estimate
Amount borrowed $10 billion
Average repayment cost $500 million 
 per year over  
 35 years
Source of repayment General tax 
 revenue2
FINAL VOTES CAST BY THE LEGISLATURE ON AB 247 (PROPOSITION 2)
(CHAPTER 81, STATUTES OF 2024)
Senate: Ayes 34 Noes 3
Assembly: Ayes 72 Noes 1
For the full text of Proposition 2, see page 70.  Analysis | 15ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
State and Districts Usually Split 
Education Facility Costs. For public 
school districts, the state usually 
pays 50 percent of the cost of new 
construction projects and 60 percent of 
the cost of renovation projects. School 
districts are expected to pay remaining 
project costs using local funds. The 
state also often shares the cost of new 
construction and renovation projects 
with community college districts. Though 
the share of costs varies among projects, 
the state commonly pays about half 
of the cost, with community college 
districts paying the rest using local 
funds.
State Mainly Uses Bonds to Pay Its 
Share of Costs. Bonds are a way that the 
state borrows money and then repays 
the money plus interest over time. For 
more information about bonds, see 
“Overview of State Bond Debt” later in 
this guide. Over the past 20 years, the 
bulk of state facility funding for schools 
and community colleges has 
come from voter-approved 
bonds (a total of $31.8 billion). 
Recently, the state provided 
an additional $4.6 billion in 
other funding for school and 
community college facilities. 
Almost all of this funding has 
already been awarded for 
specific projects. 
Districts Usually Pay Their 
Share of Costs Using Local 
Bonds. School and community 
college districts tend to pay their share of project costs using local 
bonds. Districts must get at least 
55 percent of their voters to approve the 
sale of local bonds. State law limits the 
total amount of local bonds that school 
and community college districts may 
issue. These limits are based on the 
total assessed property value within the 
district. School districts that are unable 
to raise at least $5 million under these 
limits may apply for additional state 
funding. Over the past 20 years, voters 
approved $181 billion in local bonds for 
public school and community college 
facility projects. 
PROPOSAL
New Bond for Public School and 
Community College Facilities. 
Proposition 2 allows the state to sell 
a $10 billion bond for public school 
and community college facilities. As 
Figure 1 shows, the $8.5 billion for 
public schools (or 85 percent of the total AUTHORIZES BONDS FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY 
COLLEGE FACILITIES. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE. PROPOSITION
22

16 | AnalysisANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
bond amount) is split among four types 
of facility projects. For new construction 
and renovation projects, school districts 
would apply for and be awarded funding 
mainly on a first-come, first-served 
basis. The state would award the 
career technical education and charter 
school funds through a competitive 
application process. A small portion 
of new construction and renovation 
funds must be set aside for small school 
districts. Unlike for public schools, the 
$1.5 billion for community colleges (or 
15 percent of the total bond amount) 
is not split in a prescribed way among 
specific types of projects. Community 
college bond funds may be used for any 
mix of new buildings, renovations, land 
purchases, and equipment. Community 
colleges would prepare a plan listing 
their statewide project priorities. The 
Governor and the Legislature would 
select specific projects to fund. 
Proposition 2 requires districts to 
complete certain tasks to help ensure 
bond funds are spent as intended.
Some Renovation Funding Available 
for Certain Types of School Projects. 
Proposition 2 allows up to $115 million in 
renovation funds to be used for reducing 
lead levels in water at public school 
sites. Proposition 2 also allows school 
districts to receive extra renovation 
funding to build a new classroom or 
renovate an existing classroom that would 
be used for transitional kindergarten. 
(Beginning with the 2025–26 school 
year, all four-year olds will be eligible for a year of transitional kindergarten before 
entering kindergarten.) In certain cases, 
school districts also could receive extra 
renovation funding to expand or build 
a new gymnasium, multipurpose room, 
library, or school kitchen. 
Increases State Share of Costs for Certain 
School Districts. For some school districts, 
Proposition 2 increases the state’s share 
of new construction project costs from 
50 percent to as much as 55 percent. 
Proposition 2 also increases the state’s 
share of renovation project costs from 
60 percent to as much as 65 percent 
for these school districts. In general, the 
state would pay a higher share of project 
costs for school districts that have lower 
assessed property values and have a 
higher share of their students who are low 
income, English learners, or foster youth. 
Allows More School Districts to Apply for 
Additional State Funding. Proposition 2 
allows school districts that are unable to 
raise at least $15 million from local bonds 
(up from $5 million) to apply for additional 
state funding. This amount would increase 
by inflation in future years.
FISCAL EFFECTS
Increased State Costs of About 
$500 Million Each Year for 35 Years 
to Repay the Bond. The estimated 
cost to repay the bond would be about 
$500 million each year (annually) over 
a 35-year period. Payments would be 
made from the state General Fund. (The 
General Fund is the account the state uses 
to pay for most public services, including PROPOSITION AUTHORIZES BONDS FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY 
COLLEGE FACILITIES. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE. 22
For the full text of Proposition 2, see page 70.  Analysis | 17AUTHORIZES BONDS FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY 
COLLEGE FACILITIES. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE. PROPOSITION
2
ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CONTINUED
education, health care, and prisons.) This 
would be less than one-half of 1 percent 
of the state’s total General Fund budget. 
Since the state has to pay interest on the 
money it borrows, the total cost of the 
bond would be about 10 percent more 
(after adjusting for inflation) than if the 
state paid up front with money it already 
has. 
Unclear Effect on Local Costs Statewide. 
The availability of state bond funds could 
affect some districts’ local costs. For 
example, some districts could respond 
by seeking new local bonds to help them 
meet project matching requirements. 
These districts would see an increase 
in their local costs. In contrast, other districts could respond by borrowing less 
because the state funds could pay costs 
districts otherwise would have covered. 
These districts would see a decrease in 
their local costs. Overall, the effect on 
local costs statewide is unclear. 
Visit sos.ca.gov/campaign-lobbying/cal-access-
resources/measure-contributions/2024-
ballot-measure-contribution-totals for a list 
of committees primarily formed to support or 
oppose this measure.
Visit fppc.ca.gov/transparency/
top-contributors.html 
to access the committee’s top 10 contributors. 2
2
18 | Arguments Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency. ★ ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 2  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 2  ★
PROPOSITION 2 WILL INCREASE DEBT AND RESULT IN 
HIGHER PROPERTY TAXES 
California already owes big banks and billionaire investors 
more than $78 billion. Prop. 2 adds another $10 billion—$18 
billion when repaid with interest—for school and community 
college districts. This is on top of the approximately 40% of 
the total state budget guaranteed to go to public education 
from Proposition 98. 
Under the funding formula used in Prop. 2, school districts 
must provide a “local match” of funds to receive money from 
the bonds. That will lead to districts issuing new local school 
bonds, which are paid for by adding new charges to property 
tax bills. 
PROP. 2 IGNORES DECLINING ENROLLMENT IN SCHOOLS 
AND COMMUNITY COLLEGES 
It’s reckless to borrow billions more to pay for more school 
buildings when district enrollment is declining. According to the state Department of Finance, “California experienced 
the 6th consecutive decrease in total Public K–12 
Enrollment in the 2022–23 school year,” and over the next 
ten years, if current trends hold, a further decline of 661,500 
by 2032–33. 
Prop. 2 borrows $1.5 billion for California Community 
College facilities, but enrollment in the state’s community 
colleges has declined since 2019. The Public Policy Institute 
of California projects that community college enrollment “will 
not recover to pre-pandemic levels. ” 
While the promises made by proponents cannot be 
guaranteed, Prop. 2 does guarantee higher taxes for over-
burdened Californians. 
VOTE NO ON PROP. 2. 
Assemblyman Bill Essayli
Jon Coupal, President
Howard Jarvis Taxpayers AssociationVOTE YES ON PROP. 2 TO HELP MORE CALIFORNIA 
STUDENTS LEARN IN SAFE, CLEAN, UPGRADED 
SCHOOLS!
Many public schools and community colleges throughout 
California are outdated and need repairs and upgrades to 
meet basic health and safety standards, prepare students 
for college and 21st Century careers, and retain and attract 
quality teachers. Prop. 2 will meet those needs and is guided 
by strict taxpayer accountability protections so funds are 
spent as promised with local control. 
REPAIRING AND UPGRADING CALIFORNIA’S PUBLIC 
SCHOOLS 
Many schools in California are old, deteriorating, unsafe 
and cannot support the basic needs of our children. 
Prop. 2 provides funding for urgent repairs to leaky roofs; 
deteriorating gas, electrical, and sewer lines; plumbing 
and restrooms; providing clean drinking water; removing 
hazardous mold, asbestos, and lead paint from our schools; 
and protecting students from extreme heat. 
MAKING SCHOOLS SAFER 
Too many of our local schools lack adequate safety and 
security protections. Prop. 2 will make students safer by 
funding door locks, emergency communications and security 
systems, fire alarms, smoke detectors, and more. 
PREPARING STUDENTS FOR 21st CENTURY CAREERS 
Prop. 2 will upgrade local schools and community colleges 
including science, engineering, career technical, and 
vocational education classrooms; labs; and learning 
technology. It will help more students get job training, 
technical knowledge, and specialized skills to compete for 
good-paying jobs in the competitive economy. 
INCREASING ACCESS TO AN AFFORDABLE COLLEGE 
EDUCATION 
Prop. 2 will increase access to quality, affordable higher 
education for all Californians—allowing more students 
to start their college education, earn college credits, and 
transfer to a four-year university without crushing debt. HELPING RETURNING VETERANS 
Prop. 2 helps local community colleges upgrade facilities to 
expand veteran services, job training, and support for the 
tens of thousands of California’s returning veterans who 
rely on their local community college for job training and to 
complete their education and enter the civilian workforce. 
RESTORING SCHOOLS AFFECTED BY WILDFIRES, 
EARTHQUAKES, AND OTHER NATURAL DISASTERS 
Prop. 2 provides immediate assistance to schools that are 
damaged or destroyed by wildfires, floods, earthquakes, 
and other natural disasters so they can quickly get up 
and running. 
PROTECTING LOCAL CONTROL OVER EVERY PROJECT 
Prop. 2 protects local control by requiring that its funding 
only be used for projects approved by local school and 
community college districts, with local community input. 
All of the money will be controlled and spent locally, where 
taxpayers have a voice in deciding how these funds are 
best used to improve their neighborhood schools, without 
increasing local property taxes. 
FISCALLY RESPONSIBLE WITH TOUGH TAXPAYER 
ACCOUNTABILITY 
Prop. 2 requires public disclosure of every dollar, 
tough independent financial audits, and strict limits on 
administrative and bureaucratic costs. These protections 
ensure that funding is spent directly on schools and used 
efficiently and as promised. 
Our schools are in desperate need of upgrades and repairs to 
ensure our students are safe and ready to learn. Prop. 2 will 
help our students succeed. 
PLEASE JOIN US IN VOTING YES ON PROP. 2.
David Goldberg, President
California Teachers Association
Sheri Coburn, Executive Director
California School Nurses Organization
Larry Galizio, Chief Executive Officer
Community College League of CaliforniaPROPOSITION AUTHORIZES BONDS FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY 
COLLEGE FACILITIES. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE. 2
2
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.  Arguments | 19★ ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 2  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 2  ★
Prop. 2 ensures that California students have the opportunity 
to learn in safe, updated schools while protecting taxpayers. 
PROP. 2 IS NOT A TAX INCREASE 
Prop. 2 will fund local upgrades and repairs to schools and 
community colleges without raising state or local taxes, 
despite what critics say. Some of the voices against Prop. 2 
are ignorant about state bond financing and are making 
untrue claims because they simply want the state to cut 
funding for public education. 
WE CAN’T WAIT ANY LONGER 
Too many California students attend schools with leaky roofs, 
unsafe drinking water, mold, asbestos, lead paint, and lead 
pipes. There is a massive backlog of local school repairs but 
no state funding available for them. Prop. 2 provides the 
funding so our schools get the upgrades they desperately 
need, ensuring students have safe, healthy schools to 
support learning. 
TOUGH ACCOUNTABILITY AND TAXPAYER PROTECTIONS 
Prop. 2 puts local voters in control of how school bond monies are spent. It requires public disclosure of all state 
and local spending, annual audits, and tough accounting 
standards. Additionally, it protects taxpayers from higher 
local property taxes by providing state matching funds to 
local communities so they do not need to raise even more 
money to fund the full cost of school repairs and upgrades. 
Prop. 2 is a bipartisan measure that will help more students 
get a quality education, increase access to an affordable 
college education, and improve job training opportunities for 
veterans and students. 
Vote YES on Prop. 2.
Susan Dixon, State President
California Retired Teachers Association
Diana Limon, Director
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local  
  Union 11
Sheri Coburn, Executive Director
California School Nurses OrganizationNO ON PROPOSITION 2: Tell politicians to prioritize 
education funding over free healthcare for illegal immigrants 
in our state budget, rather than further burdening taxpayers 
to pay off Sacramento’s ballooning bond debt.
Proposition 2 is yet another attempt to circumvent 
California’s financial problems by asking taxpayers to 
approve a $10 billion bond for education financing that 
should have been included in this year’s $288 billion 
budget package. 
A budget is a reflection of priorities, and our State 
Legislature chose to prioritize over $5 billion for universal 
illegal immigrant healthcare rather than providing funds to 
support and repair our school infrastructure. Billions in new 
bond debt is not the answer. 
Prop. 2 Saddles Future Generations with Debt that Our Kids 
Will Be Paying Off for Decades 
The Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association points out that 
bonds are borrowed money that must be paid back, plus 
interest, even if that means cutting vital programs to do it. 
Governor Newsom recently declared a budget emergency 
because California spends more than it takes in. Children 
in school today will be drowning in new debt for decades if 
Prop. 2 passes. 
Politicians want to borrow $10 billion from Wall Street and 
make Californians pay it back with interest, forcing taxpayers 
to pay up to $10 billion for debt service payments. 
California Is Out of Money, Californians Are Over-taxed, 
Prop. 2 Will Make Things Worse 
California, with rampant inflation and the highest gas and 
graduated income taxes in the nation, already has over 
$109 billion of outstanding and unissued bonds alongside 
almost $200 billion of unfunded pension liabilities and 
retiree medical benefits—over a quarter trillion dollars. 
Californians will have to shoulder a greater increase 
in their tax burden paying off our bonds and related interest payments. Our bond debt alone is already $2,460 
per person. 
Sacramento politicians overspend, issue bonds, and punish 
us with tax hikes on our cars, gasoline, and income. And 
those tax dollars rarely go where politicians say they will—
our roads crumble while billions go to High-Speed Rail. 
Prop. 2 Is the Latest in a Long List of Broken Promises 
In 2012, California voters approved Proposition 30’s 
“temporary” increases to income and sales taxes. Then, 
Proposition 55 in 2016 extended many of those “temporary” 
taxes to 2028. Both times, teachers’ unions promised 
billions in funding for our schools. 
Money pits in the vast education bureaucracy will suck up 
most Prop. 2 funds without one cent going toward direct 
instruction in school classrooms. Instead, this money will 
be spent on wasteful construction projects benefiting 
special interests. 
California’s schools are consistently ranked near the lowest 
in the country. Rather than throwing nearly $20 billion 
into school construction projects, our state needs a well 
thought out, long-term solution to achieve a high standard 
of excellence in reading, writing, and math. Prop. 2 does 
nothing to improve classroom instruction or help our children 
succeed. 
Voters rejected Proposition 13, a $15 billion school bond, in 
2020 for exactly these reasons. 
VOTE NO ON PROP. 2. 
Assemblyman Bill EssayliAUTHORIZES BONDS FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY 
COLLEGE FACILITIES. LEGISLATIVE STATUTE. PROPOSITION
2


20 | Title and Summary PROPOSITION CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO MARRIAGE. 
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT. 3
OFFICIAL TITLE AND SUMMARY PREPARED BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
• Amends California Constitution 
to recognize fundamental right to 
marry, regardless of sex or race.
• Removes language in California 
Constitution stating that marriage is 
only between a man and a woman.SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE ANALYST’S 
ESTIMATE OF NET STATE AND LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT FISCAL IMPACT: 
• No change in revenues or costs for 
state and local governments. The text of this measure can be found on page 75 and the Secretary of State’s website at 
voterguide.sos.ca.gov.3
FINAL VOTES CAST BY THE LEGISLATURE ON ACA 5 (PROPOSITION 3)
(CHAPTER 125, STATUTES OF 2023)
Senate: Ayes 31 Noes 0
Assembly: Ayes 67 Noes 0
For the full text of Proposition 3, see page 75.  Analysis | 21ANALYSIS BY THE LEGISLATIVE ANALYST 
BACKGROUND
The federal courts have said that same-
sex couples can marry, but outdated 
language in the California Constitution 
still says that marriage can only be 
between a man and a woman. 
PROPOSAL
Proposition 3 updates the Constitution 
to match what the federal courts have 
said about who can marry.
FISCAL EFFECTS
Proposition 3 would not change who 
is allowed to marry in California. This 
means there would be no change in 
revenues or costs to state and local 
governments.CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO MARRIAGE. 
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT. PROPOSITION
3
3Visit sos.ca.gov/campaign-lobbying/cal-access-
resources/measure-contributions/2024-
ballot-measure-contribution-totals for a list 
of committees primarily formed to support or 
oppose this measure.
Visit fppc.ca.gov/transparency/
top-contributors.html 
to access the committee’s top 10 contributors. 
3
22 | Arguments Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency. PROPOSITION CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO MARRIAGE. 
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT. 3
★ ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 3  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 3  ★
The authors o f Proposition 3 claim it’s about the “freedom 
to marry,” but that’s not true. This extreme amendment 
goes TOO FAR and puts vulnerable people at risk. It’s not 
just about updating our state laws. This measure takes 
away essential safeguards that protect marriage and 
children. 
Supporters say we need Prop. 3 due to “discrimination. ” 
But same-sex marriage has been legal since 2015, and 
no one is trying to change that: not the Supreme Court 
nor anyone else. There is simply NO REASON to pass this 
dangerous measure. 
Proposition 3 removes ALL protections on marriage, 
including limits on children, close relatives, and three or 
more people marrying each other. All civilized societies 
prohibit these things because they HURT PEOPLE. That’s 
why the unclear wording of Prop. 3 will cause huge 
problems. 
Backers claim to care about civil rights and fairness. 
However, Proposition 3 puts what adults want ahead of what children need. By saying mothers and fathers 
aren’t necessary, it IGNORES years of studies and basic 
common sense affirming that kids do best when raised by 
both parents in a stable home. 
California can support equal rights without this risky and 
unnecessary measure. Proposition 3 THREATENS our 
shared values of healthy families, healthy children, and a 
healthy society. It’s not about equality; it’s about radically 
changing marriage and family. 
Let’s protect our kids, families, and communities. Vote NO 
on Proposition 3! 
Learn more at www.Proposition3.net or 
www.CaliforniaFamily.org. 
Jonathan Keller, President 
California Family Council 
Rev. Tanner DiBella, Founder 
The American Council of Evangelicals VOTE YES on Proposition 3—Protect Your Freedom to 
Marry!
Proposition 3 protects every Californian’s right to marry—
regardless of gender or race. 
Proposition 3 would update our state constitution to 
align with existing law that allows marriage for same-sex 
couples, reflecting current court decisions and our values 
as Californians. 
Proposition 3 is supported by a broad and bipartisan 
coalition of civic and faith leaders as well as civil rights 
leaders. 
Why we need Proposition 3: 
Although marriage equality for same-sex couples 
has been the law of the land in the United States for 
years, California’s Constitution still says that same-sex 
couples are not allowed to marry. Recent threats against 
fundamental rights have made it clear California must be 
proactive in protecting the freedom to marry regardless of 
gender or race. 
Proposition 3 removes discriminatory language from 
the California Constitution that states marriage is only 
between a man and a woman and replaces it with 
a provision that establishes the right to marry as a 
fundamental right, enshrining protections for same-sex 
and interracial couples. 
California has always been a leader in protecting civil 
rights and individual freedom. Proposition 3 continues 
that legacy. 
The proposition respects the freedom of religion in 
California. It would not change the existing rights of 
clergy and religious denominations to refuse to perform a 
marriage.Supporters of Proposition 3 urge you to vote YES: 
“Proposition 3 protects the right of every Californian, 
regardless of gender or race, to marry the person they 
love. ”—Equality California 
“As a faith leader, I support Proposition 3 because 
it protects the right to marry while respecting faith 
communities’ First Amendment rights. ”—The Rev. Jeff R.  
Johnson, bishop of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in 
America’s Sierra Pacific Synod 
“This ballot measure comes at a pivotal moment when 
the U.S. Supreme Court has made clear its willingness 
to revoke hard-won rights, endangering the freedoms of 
millions of Californians. ”—American Civil Liberties Union 
of Northern California 
“Although marriage equality for same-sex couples has 
been the law of the land in the United States for years, 
California’s Constitution still says that same-sex couples 
are not allowed to marry. Let’s fix it by voting YES on 
Proposition 3. Honoring the fundamental rights of all 
people and fighting discrimination wherever it exists 
is a California value. Prop. 3 helps further California’s 
commitment to protecting civil rights for all its 
residents. ”—Dolores Huerta, President, Dolores Huerta 
Foundation 
YES on Proposition 3 means FREEDOM and EQUAL 
RIGHTS for all. 
Learn more at: yesonprop3CA.com 
Assemblymember Evan Low 
Tony Hoang, Executive Director
Equality California 
Jodi Hicks, CEO
Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California 
3
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.  Arguments | 23CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO MARRIAGE. 
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT. PROPOSITION
3
★ ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 3  ★
★ REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 3  ★
Proposition 3’s opponents are wrong. Here are the facts: 
Proposition 3 PROTECTS the right of Californians to marry, 
regardless of gender or race. 
Proposition 3 DOES NOT change California’s laws 
regarding age requirements for marriage or the number of 
people in a marriage. 
Aaron Tang, a constitutional law expert at the University of 
California, Davis, notes, “Proposition 3 removes outdated 
language in the California Constitution prohibiting 
marriage between same-sex couples. ” 
For decades, Proposition 3’s opponents have sought to 
deny marriage rights to same-sex couples. They want to 
keep discriminatory language in the state constitution. 
That is why they oppose Proposition 3.
FAITH LEADERS & CIVIL RIGHTS GROUPS SUPPORT YES 
ON 3 
The vast majority of Californians believe that every 
Californian, regardless of gender or race, should have the right to marry the person they love. That’s why 
Proposition 3 is supported by a broad and bipartisan 
coalition of faith leaders, civil rights advocates, and family-
centered organizations. 
California has always been a leader in protecting civil 
rights and individual freedom. Proposition 3 continues 
that legacy.
Learn more at yesonprop3CA.com. 
VOTE YES ON PROPOSITION 3—PROTECT YOUR 
FREEDOM TO MARRY 
Senator Scott Wiener 
Mia Kirby, Senior Regional Organizing Lead
Human Rights Campaign 
Maria Roman, Vice President
TransLatin@ Coalition Californians should vote NO on Proposition 3, the so-
called “Freedom to Marry” initiative. Supporters say 
it updates our constitution to match current laws, 
but it actually changes the definition of marriage in 
DANGEROUS and unexpected ways. 
The big problem with Proposition 3 is that it overrides all 
laws on marriage. A “fundamental right” to marry means 
it would remove protections against child marriages, 
incest, and polygamy. Is this what we want for California? 
The unclear wording of Prop. 3 would lead to SERIOUS 
PROBLEMS that harm our society. 
You may hear we need this measure to protect against 
possible Supreme Court decisions. But same-sex 
marriage has been legal across the country since 2015. 
Proposition 3 is fixing a problem that doesn’t exist and is 
instead causing HARM. 
Some supporters say “extremist politicians” could 
threaten marriage rights. But it is the backers of 
Proposition 3 who are EXTREME by wanting to remove all 
marriage guidelines. Sadly, all the talk about “equality” 
hides the RADICAL changes behind this proposal. 
Current laws and court decisions already protect the right 
to marry, regardless of gender, sexual orientation, race, 
or ethnicity. These laws also protect children, prevent 
exploitation, and keep marriage as a union between two 
consenting adults. But Proposition 3 would REMOVE these 
defenses. 
Instead of protecting civil rights in California, this measure 
risks the civil rights of children. It even opens the door to 
polygamy—marriage between more than two people. This 
would only exploit vulnerable women and children. Is this 
the kind of “EQUALITY” we want in our state? 
By changing the definition of marriage, this measure also 
suggests that children don’t need both a mom and a dad. This goes against years of research showing that kids do 
best when raised by their mother and father in a stable, 
married home. 
Children without a mother or father are more likely to have 
emotional issues, take part in risky behaviors, struggle in 
school, and face financial problems. 
Proposition 3 INCREASES RISKS to kids’ emotions, 
physical health, and education. 
California is a leader in diversity and acceptance. But 
TRUE PROGRESS doesn’t mean getting rid of all rules and 
protections. We should update our laws carefully while 
keeping necessary safeguards. 
Instead of rushing to redefine marriage in ways that 
EXCLUDE a child’s mother or father, we should insist that 
all adults conform to the needs of children. Proposition 3 
FAILS this test badly. 
Don’t be tricked by talk of “love” and “acceptance. ” 
Proposition 3 is a RECKLESS and unneeded measure that 
would hurt our state. It removes important protections for 
marriage while pretending to expand rights. 
Californians deserve better than this poorly written and 
HARMFUL proposition. We can protect marriage and civil 
rights without allowing child brides, incest, and polygamy. 
Vote NO on Proposition 3 to keep common-sense marriage 
rules and protect our children, families, and society. 
For more information, visit www.Proposition3.net or 
www.CaliforniaFamily.org. 
Jonathan Keller, President 
California Family Council 
Tanner DiBella, President 
The American Council for Evangelicals


